The link of social solidarity to which repressive law corre- 
sponds is the one whose break constitutes a crime. By this 
name we call every act which, in any degree whatever, invokes 
against its author the characteristic reaction which we term 
punishment. To seek the nature of this link is to inquire into 
the cause of punishment, or, more precisely, to inquire what 
crime essentially consists of. 

.‘Surely there are crimes of different kinds; but among all 
the% kinds, there is, no less surely, a common element. The 
proof of this is that the reaction which crimes call forth from 
society, in respect of punishment, is, save for differences of 
jdegree, always and ever the same. The unity of effect shows 
Ithe unity of the cause. Not only among the types of crime 
^provided for legally in the same society, but even among those 
which have been or are recognized and punished in different 
social systems, essential resemblances assuredly exist. As 
different as they appear at first glance, they must have a com- 
mon foundation, for they everywhere affect the moral conscience 
of nations in the same way and produce the same ilesult. They 
are all crimes ; that is to say, acts reprised by definite punish- 
ments. The essential properties of a thing' are those which 
one observes universally wherever that thing exists and which 
pertain to it alone. If, then, we wish to know what crime ^aen- 
tially is, we must extract the elenients of crimes whicbi ^ found 
in aU criminological varieties in different social systems. 
I^ne must be neglected. The juridical conceptions of the most 

7Q 



MECHANICAL SOLIDARITY 


71 


inferior societies are no less significant than those of the most 
elevated societies ; they are not less instructive. To omit any 
would expose us to the error of finding the essence of crime where 
it is not. Thus, the biologist would have given vital phenomenaj 
a very inexact definition, if he had disdained to observe mono- 
cellular organisms, for, solely from the contemplation of organ-] 
isms of higher type, he would have wrongly concluded that life 
essentially consists in organization. 

The method of finding this permanent and pervasive element 
is surely not by enumerating the acts that at all times and in 
every place have been termed crimes, observing, thus, the char- 
acters that they present. For if, as it may be, they are actions 
which have universally been regarded as criminal, they are the 
smallest minority, and, consequently, such a method would give 
us a very mistaken notion, since it would be applied only to 
exceptions. ‘ These variations of repressive law prove at the 
same time that the constant characteristic could not be found 
among the intrinsic properties of acts imposed or prohibited by 
penal rules, since they present such diversity, but rather in the 
relations that they sustain with some condition external to them. 

It has been thought that this relation is found in a sort of 
antagonism between these actions and great social interests, and 

' It is this method which Garafalo has followed. No doubt, he seems to 
renounce it when he realizes the impossibility of drawing up a list of acts uni- 
versally punished {Criminologie, p. 5), which is excessive. But he finally reverts 
to it, since, in sum, natural crime is, for him, that which runs counter to the senti- 
ments which are everywhere at the basis of penal law ; that is to say, the invari- 
able part of the moral sense and that alone. But why would a crime which ran 
counter to some particular sentiment in certain social systems be less a crime 
than others? Garafalo is thus led to refuse the name of crime to those acts 
which have been universally recognized as crimes in certain social systems, and 
accordingly, to retrace artificially the elements of criminality. The result is 
that his notion of crime is singularly incomplete. It is vacillating because its 
author does not trouble himself to enter into a comparison of all social systems, 
but excludes a great number that he treats as abnormal. One can say of a 
social fact that it is abnormal relative to the type of the species, but a species 
cannot be abnormal. The two words cannot be joined. As interesting as is 
Oarafalo’s attempt to arrive at a scientific notion of a delict, it has not been made 
with a method sufficiently exact and precise. This is shown by the expression 
naiitral delict which he uses. Are not all delicts natural? It seems probable 
that here is a return to Spencer’s doctrine, which treats social life as truly nat- 
ural only in industrial societies. Unfortunately, nothing is more incorrect. 



72 


  


it has been said that penal rules announce the fundamental con- 
ditions of collective life for each social type. Their authority 
thus derives from their necessity. Moreover, as these neces- 
sities vary with societies, the variability of repressive law would 
thus be explained. But we have already made ourselves explicit 
on this point. Besides the fact that such a theory accords too 
lai^e a part in the direction of social evolution to calculation 
and reflection, there are many acts which have been and still 
are regarded as criminal without in themselves being harmful 
to society. What social danger is there in touching a tabooed 
object, an impure animal or man, in letting the sacred fire die 
down, in eating certain meats, in failure to make the traditional 
sacrifice over the graves of parents, in not exactly pronouncing 
the ritual formula, in not celebrating certain holidays, etc.? 
We know, however, what a large place in the repressive law of 
many peoples ritual regimentation, etiquette, ceremonial, and 
religious practices play. We have only to open the Pentateuch 
to convince ourselves, and as these facts normally recur in cer- 
tain social types, we cannot think of them as anomalies or 
p^hologlcal cases which we can rightly neglect. 

-'>^Even when a criminal act is certainly harmful to society, it 
is not true that the amount of harm that it does is regularly 
related to the intensity of the repression which it calls forth. 
In the penal law of the most civilized people, murder is univer- 
sally regarded as the greatest of crimes. However, an economic 
crisis, a stock-market crash, even a failure, can disorganize the 
social body more severely than an isolated homicide. No 
doubt murder is always an evil, but there is no proof that it is 
the greatest of evils. What is one man less to society? What 
does one lost cell matter to the organism? We say that the 
future general security would be menaced if the act remained un- 
punished ; but if we compare the significance of the danger, real 
as it is, and that of the punishment, the disproportion is striking. 
Moreover, the examples we have just cited show that an act can 
be dis^trous to society without Jncumng the least repression. 

‘ This definition of crime is, then, completely inadequate. | 



MECHANICAL SOLIDARITY 


73 


Shall we say, in modifying it, that priminal acts are those 
whic h seem harmful to the society t h at represses them, t h^ 
pe ^l rules express, not the conditions which are essential to 
social life, but those which appear such to the group which ob- 
serves them? But such an explanation explains nothing, for 
it does not show why, in so large a number of cases, societies 
are mistaken and have imposed practices which by themselves 
were not even useful.?. Surely this pretended solution of the 
problem reduces itself to a veritable truism, for if societies thus 
oblige each individual to obey their rules, it is evidently because 
they believe, wrongly or rightly, that this regular and punctual 
obedience is indispensable to them. That is why they hold to 
it so doggedly. The solution then amounts to saying that 
societies jud^e these rules nec^sary because they inrigp thpmn 
n ecessaix What we must find out is why they consider them 
^ necessary. If this sentiment had its cause in the objective 
necessity of penal prescriptions, or, at least, in their utility, it 
would be an explanation. But that Is contradicted by the 
facts ; the question remains entirely unresolved. *, 

However, this last theory is not without some foundation; 
it is with reason that it seeks in certain states of the subject the 
constitutive conditions of criminality. } In effect, the only com- 
mon characteristic of all crimes is that they consist/ — except 
some apparent exceptions with which we shall deal later -4* in" 
acts universally disapproved of by members of each society^ 
We ask ourselves these days whether this reprobation is rational, 
whether it would not be wiser to see in crime only a malady 
or an error. But we need not enter upon these discuss^op a : 
we seek to determin e'**Wli’gt i s oFhas been, not ,what ought 
to be. Thus, the reality of the fact that we have just estab- 
Iishe3 is not contestable ; ^ that is, that crime shocks sentiments 
\ghic^ , for £^given social system, are f ound in all h ealthy^ 

|ItTs"iiM ^ssible otherwise to determine the nature of these, 
sentiments, to define them in terms of the function of their par^ 
ticular objects, for these objects have infinitely varied and can 



74 


  

still vary.* ^ Today, there are altruistic sentiments which pre- 
sent this character most markedly ; but there was a time, not 
far distant from ours, when religious, domestic, and a thousand 
other traditional sentiments had e;cactly the same effects. 
Even now, net g^ve sympathy for another does no t. as ^Qarafalo 
wishes, alone produce this result. Do we not have the same 
aversion, in times of peace, for the man who betrays his country 
as for the robber or the murderer? In a country where monar- 
chical sentiment is still strong, do crimes against Use-majeste not 
call forth general indignation? In democratic countries, are 
injuries to the people not inveighed against? We can not 
thus draw up a list of sentiments whose violation constitutes 
a cnme ; they distinguish themselves from others only by this 
trait, that they are common to the average mass of individuals ' 
Qf the same society. So the rules which prohibit these acts 
and which penal law sanctions are the only ones to which the 
famous juridical axiom ignorance of the law is no excuse is applied 
without fiction. As thfey are graven in all consciences, every- 
body knows them and feels that they are well founded. It is at 
least true of the normal state. If we come upon adults who do 
not know these fundamental rules or do not recognize their 
authority, such ignorance or insubmissiveness is an undeniable 
sign of pathological perversion.j Or, if it happens that a 
penal^ disposition exists for a long time although opposed by . 
all, it is because of very exceptional circumstances, conse- 
quently, abnormal ; and such a state of affairs can never long 

T dure. 

This explains the particular manner in which penal law is 
codified. Every w ritten law has a dotible objec t : t o prescribe 
certain obligations , and to d efine the sanctions which are at- 
tached to themj In civil law, and more generally in every type 
m law with re^tutive sanctions, the legislator takes up and 

* We do not see what scientific reason Garafalo has for sasdng that the moral * 
sentiments actually acquired by the civilised part of humanity constitute a 
morality “not susceptible of loss, but of a continually growing development” 
(p. 9). What permits him thus to limit the changes that will come about in one 
sense or another? 



MECHANICAL SOLIDARITY 


76 


solves the two questions separately. He first determines the 
obligation with all possible precision, and it is only later that 
he stipulates the manner in which it should be sanctioned. j| For 
example, in the chapter of the French civil code which is devoted 
to the respective duties of married persons, the rights and obliga- 
tions are announced in a positive manner; but no mention is 
made of what happens when these duties are violated by one 
or the other. We must go otherwheres to find this sanction. 
Sometimes it is totally lacking. Thus, article 214 of the civil 
code orders the wife to live with her husband ; we deduce from 
that that the husband can force her to remain in the conjugal 
.domicile, but this sanction is nowhere formally indicated. 
!T enal law , on the contrary, sets forth only sanctions, but says 
J^thing of the obligations to which they correspond. It does 
not command respect for the life of another, but kills the assas- 
sin. It does not say, first off, as does civil law: Here is the 
duty; but rather. Here is the punishment. No doubt, if the 
action is punished, it is because it is contrary to an obligatory 
rule, but this rule is not expressly formulated. There can 
be only one reason for this, which is that the rule is known and' 
accepted by everybody. When a law of custom becomes written 
and is codified, it is because questions of litigation demand a 
more definite solution. If the custom continues to function 
silently, without raising any discussion or difficulties, there is 
no reason for transforming it. Since p enal la w is c odified only 
to est ablish a graduated scale of punii^ments." it is th us the 
s cale alone which can lend itself to doubt. Inversely, if rules 
whose violation is punished do not need a juridical expression, 
it is because they are ^e object of no contest, because everybody 
feels their authority. ' 

It is true that sometimes the Pentateuch does not set forth 
sanctions, though, we shall see, it contains little more than 
penal dispositions. This is the case with the Ten Command- 
ments as they are found formulated in chapter XX of Exodus 
and chapter V of Deuteronomy. But the Pentateuch, although it 

' Cf. Binding, Die Normen und ihre Ud>ertrelung, I, pp. 6 £f., Leipzig, 1872. 



76 


  


has the function of a code, is not, however, a code properly 
speaking. Its object is not to unite in a single system and to 
make precise the penal rules of the Jewish people ; it is so far 
from being a codification that the various parts of which it is 
composed seem not to have been formulated in the same epoch. 
It is above all a rdsum4 of all sorts of traditions by which the 
Jews explained to their satisfaction and in their fashion the 
genesis of the world, of their society, and of their principal social 
practices. If, then, it prescribes duties which assuredly were 
sanctioned by punishments, they were not ignored or unknown 
to the Jews, nor was it necessary to make them manifest. On 
the contrary, since the book is only a tissue of national legends, 
we can rest assured that everything that it contains was en- 
graven in every conscience. It was essentially a problem of 
reproducing and stabilizing the popular beliefs on the origins 
of these precepts, on the historical circumstances in which they 
were believed to have been promulgated, on the sources of their 
authority. Thus, from this point of view, the determination of 
punishment becomes something accessory.^ 
yi It is for this reason that the functioning of repressive justice 
tends to remain more or less diffuse.' In very different social 
systems, it does not function through the means of a special 
magistracy, but the whole society participates in a rather large 
measure. In primitive societies, where, as we shall see, law is 
wholly penal, it is the assembly of the people which renders 
justice.^ This was the case among the ancient Germans.® In 
Rome, while civil affairs were given over to the praetor, criminal 
matters were handled by the people, first by the curile comites, 
and then, beginning with the law of the Twelve Tables, by the 
centurial comites. Until the end of the republic, even though 
in fact it had delegated its powers to permanent commissions, 
the people remained, in principle, the supreme judge of this 

♦The only true exceptions to this particularity of penal law are produced 
when the act is committed by the public authority which created the delict. 
In this case, the duty is generally defined independently of the sanction; we 
will later consider the cause of this exception. 

♦ Tacitus, Germania^ ch. xii. 



MECHANICAL SOLIDARITY 


77 


type of process.® In Athens, under the legislation of Solon, 
criminal jurisdiction partly rested in the ‘HAtaui, a vast assem- 
blage which nominally comprised all the citizens over the age 
of thirty.^ Then, among Germano-Latin peoples, society, in 
the person of the jury, intervened in the exercise of these same 
functions. 'The diffused state in which this part of judicial 
power is thus found would be inexplicable, if the rules whose 
observation it assured, and, consequently, the sentiments to 
which these rules corresponded, were not immanent in all con- 
sciences. It is true that, in other cases, the power is wielded by 
a privileged class or by particular magistrates. But these facts 
do not lessen the demonstrative value of the preceding, for, • 
simply because collective sentiments are enforced only through 
certain intermediaries, it does not follow that they have ceased 
to be collective while localizing themselves in a restricted num- 
ber of consciences. This delegation may be due either to the 
very great multiplicity of affairs which necessitate the institu- 
tion of special functionaries, or to the very great importance 
assumed by certain persons or certain classes and which makes 
tl^em the authorized interpreters of collective sentiments, i 
./^But we have not defined crime when we say that it consists 
in an offense to collective sentiments, fo r there arc som^ among 
these which caji be. offfijjded without there being,§^crime7| ^hus, 
incest is the object of quite general aversion, and yet it is an 
act that is only immoral. It is in like case with the reflec- 
tions upon a woman's honor accruing from promiscuous inter- 
course outside of marriage, from the fact of total alienation of^ 
her liberty at another's hands, or of accepting such alienation 
[rom another.^! The collective sentiments to which crime corre- 

I iponds inust, Werefore, singularize themselves from others by 
lome distinctive property; they must have a certain average 
ntensity. Not only^ re they alLconscieuces, but 

\>hey are strongly engraven. They are not hesitant and super- 

W Alief, tiistoire de la procedure civile et du droit criminel chez lea RomainSt 
tr. fr. § 829 ; Rein, Criminalrecht der Roemer, p. 63. 

^ Cf. Gilbert, Handhuch der Griechischen StaatsalterthUmer, I, p. 138, Leipzig, 
1881. 



78 


  


ficial desires, but emotions and tendencies which are strongly 
ingrained in us A The proof of this is the extreme slowness with 
^hich penal law evolves. Not only is it modified more slowly 
than custom, but it is the part of positive law most refractory 
to change. Observe, for example, what has been accomplished 
in legislation since the beginning of the nineteenth century in 
the different spheres of juridical life; the innovations in the 
matter of penal law are extremely rare and restricted compared 
to the multitude of new dispositions introduced into the civil 
law, commercial law, administrative law, and constitutional 
law. When we compare the penal law which the Twelve 
Tables set up in Rome with that which we find there in the 
classical epoch, the changes that are observable are small indeed 
compared to those induced in the civil law during the same 
period. From the time of the Twelve Tables, says Mainz, the 
principal crimes and delicts are constituted : “During ten gen- 
erations, the catalogue of public crimes had added to it only 
some few laws which punished thievery, brigandage, and per- 
haps the plagium” * , As for private delicts, we encounter only 
two new ones : rapine (actio bonorum vi raptomm) and damage 
unjustly caused (damnum injuria datum). fThe same phe- 
/nomenon is universally found. In lower societies, law, as we 
shall see, is almost exclusively penal ; it is likewise very station- 
a^. Generally, religious law is always repressive ; it is essen- 
tially conservative. / This fixity of penal law evinces the resistive 
force of the collective sentiments to which it corresponds. In- 
versely, the very great plasticity of pure ly moral rules and the 
relative rapidity of their evoIution- show tEe small er ^ce of tl^ e 
sentiments at their b ase ; either they have been more recently 
acquired and “have not yet had time to penetrate deeply into 
consciences, or they are in process of losing strength and mov- 
ing from depth to surface. I 

I One last addition is still necessary in order to make our 
ofefinition exact. If, in general, the sentiments which purely 

* Esquiase historique du droit criminel de Vancienne Rome, in NouveUe Revue 
hUtorique du droit frangais et Stranger, 1882, pp. 24 and 27. 



MECHANICAL SOLIDARITY 


79 


moral sanctions protect, that is to say, diffuse sanctions, are 
less intense and less solidly organized than those which punish- 
ment, properly called, protects, nevertheless there are excep- 
tions. Thus, there is no reason for believing that]the average 
filial piety or even the elementary forms of compassion for the 
most apparentfevils today consist of sentiments more superficial 
than those concerning property or public authority.^ The way- 
ward son, however, and ^en the most hardened egotist are 
not treated as criminals, if It is not sufficient, then, that the 
sentiments be strong; they must be precise. In effect, each 
of them is relative to a very definite practice. This practice 
can be simple or complex, positive or negative, that is to say, 
consist in action or abstention, but it is always determined. It 
is a question of doing or not doing this or that, of not killing, 
not wounding, of pronouncing such a formula, of going through 
such a rite, etc. On the contrary, sentiments such as filial love 
or charity are vague aspirations towards very general objects. 
So penal laws are remarkable for their neatness and precision,] 
while purely moral rules are generally somewhat nebulous.] 
Their inchoate nature very often even makes it difficult to 
render them in a short formula. We may quite generally say- 
that a man ought to work, that he ought to have pity on others, 
etc., but we cannot determine in what fashion or in what meas- 
ure. Th^e is room here, consequently, for variations and 
miances. / On the other hand, since the sentiments which are 
incarnate in penal rules are determined, they have a much 
greater uniformity. As they cannot be understood in different 
ways, they are ever the same, j 

f ^ 

[ We are now in a position to come to a conclusion. 

The totality of beUefs and sentiments common to average- 
citizens of the same society forms a determinate system which 
h as its own life ; one may call it the collective or common con- 
scf^e. No doubt, it has not a specific organ as a substratum ; 
it is, by definition, diffuse in every reach of society. Neverthe- 
less, it has specific characteristics which make it a distinct 



80 


  


reality. It is, in effect, independent of the particular conditions 
in which individuals are placed ; they pass on and it remains. 
It is the same in the North and in the South, in great cities 
and in small, in different professions. Moreover, it does not 
change with each generation, but, on the contrary, it connects 
successive generations with one another. It is, thus, an 
entirely different thing from particular consciences, although 
it can be realized only through them. It is the psychical type 
of society, a type which has its properties, its conditions of 
existence, its mode of development, just as individual types, 
although in a different way. T^s understood, it has the right 
to be denoted by a special wordj The one which we have just 
employed is not, it is true, withdut ambiguity. As the, terms, 
collective and social, are often considered synonymous, one is 
inclined to believf that the collective conscience is the total 
social conscience,^' that is, extend it to include more than the 
psychic life of society, although, particularly in advanced 
societies, it is only a very restricted part. Judicial, govern- 
mental, scientific, industrial, in short, all special functions are 
of a psychic nature, since they consist in systems of representa- 
tions and actions. They, however, are surely outside the 
common conscience. To avoid the confusion ® into which some 
have fallen, the best way would be to create a technical expres- 
sion especially to designate the totality of social similitudes. 
However, since the use of a new word, when not absolutely 
necessary, is not without inconvenience, we shall employ the 
well-worn expression/ collective or common conscience, but we 

t all always mean the strict sense in which we have taken it. 

We can, then, to resume^ the preceding analysis, say that an 
fSUSt is criml^l when it -offends strohg and defined states of the 
collective conscience.'*! * 

* The confusion is not \mthout its dangers. Thus, we sometimes ask if the 
individual conscience varies as the collective conscience. It all depends upon 
the sense in which the word is taken. If it represents social likenesses, the varia- 
tion is inverse, as we shall see. If it signifies the total psychic life of society, the 
relation is direct. It is thus necessary to distinguish them. 

We shall not consider the question whether the collective conscience is a 
conscience as is that of the individual. By this term, we simply signify the 



MECHANICAL SOLIDARITY 


81 


The statement of this proposition is not generally called 
into question, but it is ordinarily given a sense very different 
from that which it ought to convey. We take it as if it ex- 
pressed, not the essential property of crime, but one of its 
repercussions. We well know that/crime violates very per- 
vasive and intense sentiments, but we believe that this per- 
vasiveness and this intensity derive from the criminal character 
of the act, which consequently remains to be defined/ We do 
not deny that every delict is universally reproved, but we take 
as agreed that the reprobation to which it is subjected results 
from its delictness. But we are hard put to say what this 
delictness consists of. In immorality which is particularly 
serious? I wish such were the case, but that is to reply to the 
question by putting one word in place of another, ^r it is 
precisely the problem to understand what this immorality is, and 
especially this particular immorality which society reproves by 
means of organized punishment and which constitutes criminal- J 
ity. It can evidently come only from one or ^veral charac- 
teristics common to all criminological types. 'The only one 
which would satisfy this condition is that opposition between 
a crime, whatever it is, and certain collective sentiments. It 
is, accordingly, this opposition which makes crime rather than 
being a derivative of crime. In other words, we must not say 
that an action shocks the common conscience because it is 
criminal, but rather that it is criminal because it shocks the] 
common conscience. We do not reprove it because it is a( 
crime, but it is a crime because we reprove it) As for the 
intrinsic nature of these sentiments, it is impossible to specify 
them. They have the most diverse objects and cannot be en- 
compassed in a single formula. I We can say that they relsklih 
neither to vital interests of society nor to a minimum of jus- 
tice. All these definitions are inadequate, i By this alone can 
we recognize it : a sentiment, whatever its origin and end, is 
found in all consciences with a certain degree of force and pre- 

totality of social likenesses, without prejudging the category by which this 
system of phenomena ought to be defined. 



82 


  


cision, and every action which violates it is a crime.i| Con* 
temporal^ psychology is more and more reverting to tne idea 
of Spinoza, according to which things are good because we like 
them, as against our liking them because they are good. What 


is primary is the tendency, the inclination ; the pleasure and 
pain are only derivative facts. It is just so in social life, if ^ 
l^t is soc ially bad because society disproves of it^ But, it will' 
be asked, are there not some collective sentiments which result 
from pleasure and pain which society feels from contact with 
their ends? No doubt, but they do not all have this origin. 
A great many, if not the larger part, come from other causes. 
Everything that leads activity to assume a definite form can 
give rise to habits, whence result tendencies which must be 
satisfied. Moreover, it is these latter tendencies which alone 
are truly fundamental. The others are only special forms and 
more determinate. Thus, to find charm in such and such an 
object, collective sensibility must already be constituted so as 
to be able to enjoy it. If the corresponding sentiments are 
abolished, the most harmful act to society will not only be tol- 
erated, but even honored and proposed as an example. Pleas- 
ure is incapable of creating an impulse out of whole cloth ; it 
can only link those sentiments which exist to such and such 
a particular end, provided that the end be in accord with their 
original nature. 

/ 


There are, however, some cases where the preceding does not 
explain. There are some actions which are more severely 
repressed than they are strongly reproved by general opinion. 

. Thus, a coalition of functionaries, the encroachment of judicial 
authority on administrative authority, religious functions on 
civil functions, are the object of a repression which is not in 
accord with the indignation that they arouse in consciences. 
The appropriation of public goods leaves us quite indifferent, 
and yet is punished quite severely. It may even happen that 
the act punished may not directly hurt any collective sentiment. 

^ There is nothing in us which protests against fishing and hunt- 



MECHANICAL SOLIDARITY 


83 


•ing out of season, or against overloaded conveyances on the 
public highway. But there is no reason for separating these 
delicts from others; every radical distinction” would be arbi- 
trary, since they all present, in different degree, the same 
external criterion. No doubt, in any of these examples, the 
punishment does not appear unjust. But if it is not enforced 
by public opinion, such opinion, left to itself, would either not 
object to it at all, or show itself less insistent. Thus, in all cases 
of this type, delictness does not come about, or does not entirely 
derive from the vivacity of the collective sentiments which are 
offended, but comes from some other cause. 

It is surely true that once a governmental power is instituted, 
it has, by itself, enough force to attach a penal sanction spon- 
taneously to certain rules of conduct. It is capable, by its own 
action, of creating certain delicts or of increasing the crimi- 
nological value of certain others. So, all the actions that we 
have just cited present this common character of being directed 
against some administrative organ of social life. Must we then 
admit that there are two kinds of crimes coming from two dif- 
ferent causes? Such an hypothesis cannot be considered. As 
numerous as the varieties are, crime is everywhere essentially the 
same, since it everywhere calls forth the same effect, in respect 
of punishment, which, if it can be more or less intense, does not 
by that change its nature. But the same fact cannot have two 
causes, unless this duality is only apparent, and basically they 
are one. The power of reaction which is proper to the State 
ought, then, to be of the same sort as that which is diffused 
throughout society. 

And where would it come from? From the depth of the 
interests which the State cares for and which demand protec- 
tion in a very special way ? But we know that the subversion 
of even deep interests does not alone suffice to determine the 
penal reaction; it must still be felt in a very decided way. 

” We have only to notice how Garafalo distinguishes what he calls true crimes 
from others (p. 45) ; it is but a personal judgment which does not rest upon any 
objective characteristic. 



84 


  


How does it come about that the least damage done to a gov- 
ernmental organ is punished, although many much more severe 
disorders in other social organs are reparable only civilly? 
The smallest injury to the police power calls forth a pehaTEy, 
while even repeated violation of contracts, or constant lack of 
correctness in economic relations only asks amends for the loss. 
Doubtless, the system of direction plays an eminent role in 
social life, but there are others whose interest is of great im- 
portance, yet whose functioning is not assured in this fashion. 
If the brain have its importance, the stomach is an organ which 
is likewise essential, and the sicknesses of one are menaces to 
life just as those of the other. Why is this privilege accorded 
to what is sometimes called the social brain? 

The difficulty resolves itself easily if we notice that^ where- 
ever a directive power is established, its primary and principal 
function is to create respect for the beliefs, traditions, and col- 
lective practices; that is, to defend the common conscience 
against all eneiKies within and without. It thus becomes its 
symbol* its living expression in the eyes of all. Thus, the life 
which is in the collective conscience is communicated to the 
directive organ as, the affinities of ideas are communicated to 
the words which represent them, and that is how it assumes 
a character which puts it above all others. It is no longer a 
more or less important social function ; it is the collective type 
incarnate. It participates in the authority which the latter 
exercises over consciences, and it is from there that it draws its 
force. Once constituted, however, without freeing itself from 
the source whence it flows and whence it continues to draw its 
sustenance, it nevertheless becomes an autonomous factor in 
social life, capable of spontaneously producing its own move- 
ments without external impulsion, precisely because of the 
supremacy which it has acquired. Since, moreoverj it is only 
a derivation from the force which is immanent in the collective 
conscience, it necessarily has the same properties and reacts in 
the same manner, although the latter does not react completely 
in unison. It repulses every antagonistic force as would the 



MECHANICAL SOLIDARITY 


85 


diffuse soul of society, although the latter does not feel this 
antagonism, or rather, does not feel it so directly. That is, it 
considers as criminal, actions which shock it without, however, 
shocking the collective sentiments in the same degree. But it 
is from these latter that it receives all the power which permits 
it to create crimes and delicts. Besides, not coming from with- 
out or arising from nothing, the following facts, which will be 
amply developed in the rest of this work, confirm this explana- 
tion. The extent of the activity which the governmental organ 
exercises over the number and the qualification of criminal acts 
depends on the force it receives. That can be measured either 
by the extent of the authority which it exercises over citizens, 
or by the degree of gravity recognized in crimes directed against 
it. But we shall see that it is in lower societies that this 
authority is greatest and this gravity most elevated, and more- 
over, that it is in these same social types that the collective con- 
science has the most power. 

Thus, we must always rettirn to this last ; that is whence, 
directly or indirectly, comes all criminality. ! Crime is not simply 
the disruption even of serious interests ; it is an offense against 
an authority in some way transcendent. But, from experience, 
there is no moral force superior to the individual save collective 
force. ' 


There is, moreover, a way, of checking up on the result at 
which we have just arrived. ' What characterizes crime is that 
it determines punishment, tf, then, our definition of crime is 


exact, it ought to explain all the characteristics of punishment. 
We shall proceed to this verification. ! 

But first w^\must find out what these characteristics are. '' 


x^n^figlSyst^la consists of a passionate reaction. 

This character is especially apparent in less cultivated societies. 


In effect, primitive peoples punish for the sake of punishing. 


Moreover, when the fihe constltritcs the w-hole punishment, since it is only 
a reparation whose amount is fixed, the action is on the limits of penal law and 
restitutive law. 



86 


  


make the culpable suffer particularly for the sake of making 
him suffer and without seeking any advantage for themselves 
from the suffering which they impose. The proof of this is that 
they seek neither to strike back justly nor to strike back use- 
fully, but merely to strike back. It is thus that they punish 
animals which have committed a wrong act,'® or even inanimate 
beings which have been its passive instrument.'^ When pun- 
ishment is applied only to people, it often extends further than 
the culpable and reaches the innocent, his wife, his children, his 
neighbors, etc.'® That is because the passion which is the soul 
of punishment ceases only when exhausted. If, therefore, after 
it has destroyed the one who has immediately called it forth, 
there still remains force within it, it expands in quite mechani- 
cal fashion. Even when it is quite tempered and attends only 
to the culpable, it makes its presence felt by the tendency to 
surpass in severity the action against which it is reacting. That 
is whence come the refinements of pain added to capital pun- 
ishment. 1 Even in Rome the thief not only had to return the 
stolen object, but also pay retribution of double and quadruple 
the amount.'* Moreover, is not the very general punishment 
of the lex talionis a satisfaction accorded to the passion for 
vengeance? 

But today, it is said, punishment has changed its character ; 
it is no longer to avenge itself that society punishes, it is to 
defend itself./ The pain which it inflicts is in its hands no longer 
anything but a methodical means of protection. It punishes, 
not becaus^ chastisement offers it any satisfaction for itself, but 
so that the fear of punishment may paralyze those who contem- ; 
plate evil. . This is no longer choler, but a reflected provision 
which determines jjepression. The preceding observations 
could not then be made general ; they would deal only with the 

w See Exodus, xxi, 28 ; Leviticus, xx, 16. 

For example, the instrument which has aided in the perpetration of murder. 
— See Post, Bausteine filr eine aUegemeine Rechtsunssenschuft, 1, pp. 236-231. 

See Exodus, xx, 4 and 5 ; Deuteronomy, xii, 12-18 ; Thonissen, Etudes sur 
Vhistoire du droit criminel, I, p. 70 and pp. 178 fif. 

Waiter, op, cit,, § 793. 



MECHANICAL SOLIDARITY 


87 


primitive form of punishment and would not extend to the 
existing form. 

But to justify such a radical distinction between these two 
sorts of punishment, it is not enough to state them in view of 
their employment of different ends. The nature of a practice 
does not necessarily change because the conscious intentions of 
those who apply it are modified. It might, in truth, still play 
the same role as before, but without being perceived. In this 
case, why would it transform only in that aspect which better 
explains its effects ? It adapts itself to new conditions of exist- 
ence without any essential changes. It is so with punishment. 

It is an error to believe that vengeance is but useless cruelty. 
It is very possible that, in itself, it consists of a mechanigal and 
aimless reaction, iii an emotional and irrational movement, in 
an unintelligent need to destroy ; but, in fact, what it tends to 
destroy was a menace to us. It consists, then, in a veritable 
act of defense, although an instinctive and unreflective one. We 
avenge ourselves only upon what has done us evil, and what 
has done us evil is always dangerous. The instinct of ven- 
geance is^ in sum, only the instinct of conservation exacerbated 
by peril. Thus, vengeance is far from having had the negative 
and sterile role in the history of mankind which is attributed 
to it. It is a defensive weapon which has its worth, but it is 
a rude weapon. As it has no realization of the services which 
it automatically renders, it cannot, in consequence, regulate 
; but it responds somewhat haphazardly to blind causes 
which urge it on and without anything moderating its activities. 
Today, since we better understand the end to be attained, we 
jetter know how to utilize the means at our disposal ; we pre- 
set ourselves with better means and, accordingly, more effi- ' 
ciently. But, in the beginning, this result was obtained in a 
rather imperfect manner. Between the punishment of today 
and yesterday, there is no chasm, and consequently it was not 
necessary for the latter to become something other than itself 
to accommodate itself to the role that it plays in our civilized 
societies. The whole difference derives from the fact that it 



88 


  


now produces its effects with a much greater understanding of 
what it does. But, although the individual or social conscience 
may not be without influence upon the reality that it clarifies, 
it has not the power to change its nature. The internal struc- 
ture of phenomena remains the same, whether they be conscious 
of it or not. We thus reach the conclusion that the essential 
elements of punishment are the same as of old. 

And in truth, punishment has remained, at least in part, a 
work of vengeance. It is said that we do not make the culpable 
suffer in order to make him suffer ; it is none the less true that 
we find it just that he suffer. Perhaps we are wrong, but that 
is not the question. We seek, at the moment, to define punish- 
ment as it is or has been, not as it ought to be. It is certain 
that this expression of public vindication which finds its way 
again and again into the language of the courts is not a word 
taken in vain. In supposing that punishment can really serve 
to protect us in the future, we think that it ought to be above 
all an expiation of the past. The proof of this lies in the minute 
precautions we take to proportion punishment as exactly as 
,po^ible to the severity of the crime; they would be inexplica- 
ble if we did not believe that the culpable ought to suffer 
because he has done evil and in the same degree. In effect, 
/this gradation is not necessary if punishment is only a means 
of defense. No doubt, there would be danger for society 
in having the gravest acts considered simple delicts; but it 
would be greater, in the majority of cases, if the second were 
considered as the first. Against an enemy, we cannot take too 
much precaution. Shall we say that the authors of the smallest 
misdeeds have natures le.ss perverse, and that to neutralize their 
evil instincts less stringent punishments will suffice? But if 
their motives are less vicious, they are not on that account less 
intense. Robbers are as strongly inclined to rob as murderers 
are to murder ; the resistance offered by the former is not less 
than that of the latter, and consequently, to control it, we would 
have recourse to the same means. If, as has been said, it was 
solely a question of putting down a noxious force byjux^posing ; 



MECHANICAL SOLIDARITY 


89 


force, the intensity of the second would be measured solely by 
the intensity of the first, without the quality of the latter enter- 
ing into-the consideration. The penal scale would then encom- 
* pass only a small number of degrees. Punis h ment wo uld vary 
only as the criminal is more or less hardened, and not according 
to th'e~nataTe of the criiiitol act;'' An incorrigible robber would 
be treated as an incorrigible murderer. But, in fact, if it were 
shown that a misdoer was definitely incurable, we would feel 
bound not to chastise him unduly. This is proof that we are 
faithful to the principle of retaliation, although we apply it in 
a more elevated sense than heretofore. We no longer measure 
in so material and gross a manner either the extent of the deed 
or of the punishment; but we always think that there ought 
to be an equation between the two terms, whether or not we 
benefit from this balance. Punishment, thus, remains for us 
what it was for our fathers. It is still an act of vengeance since 
it is an expiation. What we avenge, what the criminal expiates, 
is the outrage to morality. 

There is, indeed, a punishment where this passionate character 
is more manifest than elsewhere. It is the disgrace which 
doubles the majority of punishments and which grows with 
them. Very often it serves no purpose. What good is it to dis- 
grace a man who ought no longer to live in a society of his peers 
and who has superabundantly proved by his conduct that the 
most redoubtable threats are not sufficient to intimidate him? 
Disgrace is called upon when there is no other punishment, or 
as complement to a quite feeble material punishment. In the 
latter case it metes out double punishment. We can even say 
that society has recourse to legal chastisement only when the 
others are insufficient; but then why maintain them? They 
are a sort of supplementary, aimless aid, and can have no other 
cause for being other than the need of compensating evil with 
evil. It is a product of instinctive, irresistible sentiments, 
which often extend to the innocent. It is thus that the place 
of crime, the instruments which have served it, the relatives of 



90 


  


the culpable, sometimes participate in the opprobrium in which 
the criminal is involved. But the causes which determine this 
diffuse repression are the same as those of the organized repres- 
sion which accompany the former. It is sufficient, moreover, to 
see how punishment functions in courts, in order to understand 
that its spirit is completely passionate, for it is to these pas- 
sions that both prosecufdr and deTehse-attorney addF^'them- 
selyek The latter seeks to excite sympathy for the defendant, 
the former to awaken the social sentiments which have been 
violated by the criminal act, and it is under the influence of 
“these contrary passions that the judge pronounces sentence. 

/ Thus, the nature of punishment haS-.not bee n changed in 
essentfals.' All that we can say is that the need of ve ngeance is' 
better directed today than heretofore. ' The spirit of foresight 
which has been aroused no longer leaves the field so free for the 
blind action of passion. It contains it within certain limits ;_it 
is opposed to absurd violence, to unreasonable ravaging. More 
clarified, it expands less on chance. One no longer sees it turn 
against the innocent to satisfy itself. But it nevertheless 
remains the soul of penality. We can thus say that punishment 
^^nsists in a passionate reaction of graduated intensity.*^ 

But whence comes this reaction? Fro m t he individual or 
from society? 

Everybody knows that it is society that punishes, but it might 
be held that this is not by design. What puts beyond doubt 
the social character of punishment is that, once pronounced, it 
cannot be lifted except by the government in the name of 
society. If it were a satisfaction given to particular persons, 
they would always be the judges of its remission. We cannot 
conceive of a privilege imposed unless its beneficiary could 
renounce it. If it is society alone that employs the repression, 

Moreover, this is what those who find the idea of expiation unintelligible 
themselves recognize, for their conclusion is that, to be put in harmony with 
their doctrine, the traditional conception of punishment must be totally trans- 
formed and reformed from top to bottom. This is because it rests and has 
always rested upon the principle which they oppose. See Fouill6e, Science 
Sodale, pp. 307 fi. 



MECHANICAL SOJilDARITY 


91 


that is. because it is attacked when individuals are, and the 
attack directed against it is repressed by punishment. 

We can cite cases, however, where the execution of punish- 
ment depends upon the desires of particular people. In Rome, 
certain misdeeds were punished in a manner to profit the 
wronged party, who could renounce it or make it an object of 
compromise ; such were robbery unseen, rapine, slander, damagj^ 
unjustly caused.'* These delicts, which wdre called private 
(delicta pr,ivata), were different from crime properly speaking, 
whosei-repression was pursued in the name of the city. We find 
the same distinction in Greece and among the Hebrews.'® 
Among more primitive peoples punishment sometimes seems 
still more completely private, as the custom of the vendetta 
would seem to prove. These societies are composed of ele- 
mentary aggregations of quasi-familial character, and are easily 
described by the word clans. But when an attack has been 
made by one or several members of a clan against another clan, 

H is the latter which itself punishes the offense to whji;;ih. it has 
be^^ubjected.** What seemingly increases the importance of 
these facts is that it has very often been contended that the 
vendMa was primitively the unique form of punishment. But, 
then, it would have first consisted in acts of private venegeance. 
But if today society is armed with the right to punish, it can 
be, it seems, only because of a sort of delegation of individuals. 
It. is, only their representative. It guards their interest for 
them, probably because it guards them better, but these inter- 
ests are not properly its own. According to this principle, they 
would avenge themselves. Now it is society which avenges 
them, but as penal law could not have changed its nature accord- 
ing to this simple transfer, there would be nothing social about 
it- If society a ppears to play a prepond erant role in it, it is 
only as a substitute for individuals. 

^ Rut, as common as this theory is, it is contrary to facts better ■, 

Rein, op. cit., p. 111. ^ 

Among the Hebrews, robbery, violation of trust, abuse of confidence, and 
assault were treated as private delicts. 

2 ® See especially Morgan, Ancient Society, p, 76, London, 1870. 



92 


  


established. Not a single society can be instanced where the 
vendetta has been the primitive form of punishment. On the 
contrary, it is certain that penal law was essentially religious 
in its grigin. It is an evidqpt fact in India and Judea, since 
the law which was practiced there was considered revealed.** 
In Egypt, the ten books of Hermes, which contained the criminal 
l|w with all other laws relative to the government of the State, 
were called sacerdotal, and Elien affirms that, from earliest 
times, the Egyptian priests exercised judicial' power.** The 
case was the same in ancient Germany.** In Greece, justice 
was considered as an emanation from Zeus, and the sentiment 
a vengeance from God.** In Rome, the religious origins of penal 
law are clearly shown both by old traditions,** and by archaic 
practices which persisted until a late date, and by the juridical 
terminology itself.*® But religion is an essentially social phe- 
nomenon. Far from pursuing only personal ends, it exercises, 
at all times, a constraint upon the individual. It forces him 
I into practices which subject him to small or large sacrifices 
which are painful to him. He must take from his goods the 
offerings that he is compelled to present to the divinity*! he 
must take time from his work or play in which to observe rites ; 
he must impose upon himself every sort of privation which is de- 
manded of him, even to renounce life if the gods ordain. B;?li* 
gious life consists entirely in abnegation and disinter est edness. 
If, then, in primitive societies, criminal law is religious law7 we 
can be sure that the interests it serves are social. It is their 
own offenses that the gods avenge by punishment and not those 


** In Judea, the judges were not priests, but every judge was the representa- 
tive of God, the man of God. {Deuteronomy, i, 17 ; Exodus, xxii, 28.) In 
India, it was the king who judged, but this function was regarded as essentially 
religious. (Manou, VIII, v, 303-311.) 

2* Thonissen, Etudes sur Vhistoire du droit criminel, I, p. 107. 

** Zoepfl, Deutsche Rechtsgeschichte, p. 909. 

“It is the son of Saturn, “ says Hesiod, “who has given justice to men.“ 
{Works and Days, V, 279 and 280.) “When mortals commit . . . wrong acts, 
Zeus in his wisdom metes out proper punishment.” Ibid,, V, 266. Cf. Iliad, 
XVI, 384 ff. 

« Walter, op. cit., § 788. 

** Rein, op. cit., pp. 27-36. * 



MECHANICAL SOLIDARITY 


93 


of particular persons. But offenses against the gods are offenses 
against society. 

^ Thus,, in lower societies, the most numerous delicts are those 
which relate to public affairs; delicts against religion, against 
custom, against authority, etc. We need only look at the Bible, 
the laws of Manou, at the monuments which remain of the old 
Egyptian law to see the i;elatively small place accorded to pre- 
scriptions for the protection of individuals, and, contrariwise, 
the luxuriant development of repressive legislation concerning 
the different forms of sacrilege, the omission of certain religious 
duties, the demands of ceremonial, etc.-^ At the same time, 
these crimes are the most severely punished. Among the Jews, 
the most abominable attacks are those against religion.^® 
Among the ancient Germans, only two crimes were punished by 
death according to Tacitus : treason and desertion.’^ Accord- 
ing to Confucius and Meng-Tseu, impiety is a greater crime 
than murder.®^ In Egypt, the smallest sacrilege was punished 
by death.®^ In Rome, the height of criminality is found in the 
crimen perduellionis.^^ 

But then, what of the private punishments of which we gave 
some examples above ? They have a mixed nature and invoke 
at the same time the repressive sanction and the restitutive 
sanction. It is thus that the private delict of Roman law repre- 
sents a sort of intermediary between crime properly called and 
the purely civil breach. It has traits of both and is marginal 
on the confines of the two domains. It is a delict in the sense 
that the sanction fixed by law does not simply consist in a 
restoration of things to their original state ; the delinquent is 
forced not only to repair the damage he has caused, but he must 
also expiate the deed. But it is not completely a delict since, 
if it is society that metes out punishment, it is not society that 
is mistress of its applica^sc^ It is a right that it confers on 

See Thonissen, passim, ' 

** Munck, Palestine^ p. 216. 

Germania^ XII. 

Plath, Gesetz und Rechi in alien China, pp. 69 and 70, 1865. 

« Thonissen, op, cit,, I, p. 146. ** Walter, op, cit,, § 803. 



94 


  


the wronged party who alone freely exercises it.** Moreover, 
the vendetta is evidently a punishment which society recognizes 
asTegRimate, but which it leaves to particular persons to indict. 
These facts only confirm what we have said of the nature of 
penality. If this sort of intermediate sanction is in part a 
private thing, in the same degree it is not a punishment. The 
penal character is less pronounced as the social character is more 
effaced, and inversely. It is far from true that private vengeance % 
is the prototype of punishment ; it is, on the contrary, only an 
imperfect punishment. Far from attacks against persons being 
the first which were reprised, in origin they are only on the 
threshold of penal law. They are raised in the scale of crimi- 
nality only as society is more fully distressed by them, and this 
operation, which we do not have to describe, is not reducible 
simply to a transfer. On the contrary, the history of this 
penality is only a continuous series of encroachments by society 
upon the individual, or rather on elementary groups that it con- 
tains within its scope, and the result of these encroachments is 
to displace individual law more and more by social law.*^ 

But the above characteristics appertain quite as well to dif- 
fuse repression which follows simply immoral actions as they do 
to legal repression. What distinguishes legal repression is, we 
have said, that it is organized ; but in what does this organiza- 
tion consist? 

When we think of penal law as it functions in our own societies, 
we consider it as a code where very definite punishments are 
attached to equally definite crimes. The judge is given a cer- 
tain latitude in the application to each particular case of these 
general dispositions, but in its essential lineaments, punishment 
is predetermined for each category of delictuous acts. This 
planned organization does not, h ogygy er, constitute punishment, 

^ However, what accentuates the 1lllnfl|HFacter of the private delict is that 
it implies infamy, a true public punishfhSK (See Rein, op, eit., p. 916, and 
Bouvy, De Vinfamie en droit romain, p. 36.) 

** In every case, it is important to notice that the vendetta is an eminently coU 
lective thing. It is not the individual who avenges himself, but his clan. Later, 
it is to the clan or to the family that restitution is made. 



MECHANICAL SOLIDARITY 


95 


for there are societies where punishment exists without being 
fixed in advance. There is in the Bible a number of prohibitions 
which are as imperative as possible, but which are not sanc- 
tioned by any expressly formulated punishment. There is no 
doubt about their penal character, for, if the texts are silent as 
to the punishment, yet they express such a horror of the act 
that we cannot for a moment suppose that it went unpunished.®® 
There is every reason for believing, then, that this silence of 
the law comes simply from the undetermined nature of the 
repression. And, in effect, many instances in the Pentateuch 
teach us that there were acts whose criminal value was incon- 
testable, yet whose punishment was established only by the 
judge who applied it. Society knew well enough that it was 
in the presence of a crime, but the penal sanction which should 
have been attached to it was not yet determined.®® Moreover, 
even among punishments which are enunciated by the legislator, 
there are a great many which are not specified with precision. 
Thus, we know that there were different sorts of punishment 
which were not put on the same level, and moreover, in a great 
number of cases the texts speak only of death in a general 
manner, without saying what kind of death ought to be inflicted. 
According to Maine, the case was the same in primitive Rome ; 
the crimina were prosecuted before the assembly of the people 
who fixed with their sovereign will the punishment according 
to a law, at the same time as they established the reality of the 
fact incriminated.®^ Besides, even until the sixteenth century, 
the general principle of penality “is that the application was left 
to the discretion of the judge, arhitrio et officio judicis. . . . 
Only, a judge was not permitted to invent punishments other 

Deuteronomy^ vi, 26. 

“And while the children of Israel were in the wilderness, they found a man 
gathering sticks upon the sabbath day. And they that found him gathering 
sticks brought him unto Moses and Aaron, and unto all the congregation. And 
they put him in ward, because it had not been declared what should be done to 
him,** Numbers, xv, 32-34. Another time, it was a question of a man who had 
blasphemed against the name of the Lord. He was arrested, but they did not 
know what to do with him. Moses himself did not know and went to consult 
the Lord. {Leniticus, xxiv, 12-16.) 

Ancient Law. 



96 


  


than those which were customary/^ Another result of this 
power of the judge was to make entirely dependent upon his 
judgment even the qualification of the criminal act, which, 
consequently, was itself not determined.^® 

It is not, then, in the regulation of punishments that the dis-^^ 
tinctive organization of this type of repression consists. It is, 
moreover, not in the institution of criminal procedure. The 
facts that we have just cited show quite well that that remained 
faulty for a long time. The only organization which meets us 
everywhere that there is punishment properly so called is that 
resident in the establishment of a tribunal. In whatever man- 
ner it is composed, whether it comprises all the people, or only 
a select number, whether or not it follows a regular procedure 
as much in the instruction of the affair as in the application of 
the punishment, because the infraction, instead of being judged 
by each, is submitted to the consideration of a constituted 
body, because the collective reaction has a definite organ as an 
intermediary, it ceases to be diffuse; it is organized. The 
organization will be more complete the moment it exists. 

Punishment consists, then, essentially in a passionate reaction^ 
of graduated intensity that society exercises through the mediunr 
of a body acting upon those of its members who have violated 
certain rules of conduct. 

Thus, the definition we have given of crime quite easily 
explains all these characteristics of punishment. 

Ill 

Every strong state of conscience is a source of life ; it is 
/essential factor of our general vitality. Consequently, every- 
thing that tends to enfeeble it wastes and corrupts us. There 
results a troubled sense of illness analogous to that which we 
feel when an important function is suspended or lapses. It is 
then inevitable that we should react energetically against the 
v^cause that threatens us with such diminution, that we strain 

** Du Boys, Histoire du droit criminel des peuplea moderneSt VI, p. 11, 

” Du Boys, ibid.t p. 14. 



MECHANICAL SOLIDARITY 


97 


to do away with it in order to maintain the integrity of our 
conscience. 

In the first class of causes which produce this result, we must 
put the representation of a contrary state. A representation 
is not simply a mere image of reality, an inert shadow pro- 
jected by things upon us, but it is a force which raises around 
itself a turbulence of organic and psychical phenomena. Not 
only does the nervous current which accompanies the ideation 
radiate to the cortical centres around the point where it origi- 
nated and pass from one plexus to the next, but it gains a 
foothold in the motor centres where it determines movements, 
in the sensorial centres where it arouses images, sometimes 
excites beginnings of illusions and may even affect vegetative 
functions."*® This foothold is as much more considerable as the 
representation is itself more intense, as the emotional element is 
more developed. Thus, the representation of a sentiment con- 
trary to ours acts in us in the same sense and in the same 
manner as the sentiment for which it is a substitute. It is as 
if it had itself become part of our conscience. It has, in truth, 
the same affinities, although less lively ; it tends to evoke the 
same ideas, the same movements, the same emotions. It sets 
up a resistance to the play of our personal sentiment and, 
accordingly, enfeebles it by directing a great part of our energy 
in an opposing direction. It is as if a strange force were intro- 
duced by nature to upset the free functioning of our psychic life. 
That is why a conviction opposed to ours cannot manifest itself 
in our" presence without troubling us ; that is because, at the 
same time, it penetrates us, and finding itself in conflict with 
everything that it encounters, causes real disorders. Of course, 
in so far as the conflict ensues only between abstract ideas, 
there is nothing disastrous about it, because there is nothing 
deep about it. The realm of ideas is at the same time the most 
elevated and the most superficial in conscience, and the changes 
which it undergoes, not having any extended repercussions, 
have only feeble effects upon us. But when it is a question of 

See Maudsley, Phyaiologie de Vesvrit, tr. fr. p. 270. 



98 


  


a belief which is dear to us, we do not, and cannot, permit a 
contrary belief to rear its head with impunity. Every offensa 
directed against it calls forth an emotional reaction, more o^ 
less violent, which "liufhs 'gainst !Ke" offender. We“mveigh*^ 
against it, we work against it, we will to do something to it, and 
the sentiments so evolved cannot fail t(^transTate*TKeittselves 
ihto actions. We run away from it, we hold it at a distance, 
we banish it from our society, etc. '"~~ 

We do not pretend, of course, that every strong conviction 
is necessarily intolerant. The current observatioii suffices to 
show the contrary. But external causes neutralize those whose 
effects we have just analyzed. For example, there can Toe a 
general ssmapathy between adversaries which sets bounds to 
their antagonism and attenuates it. But this sympathy must 
be stronger than this antagonism ; otherwise it would not sur- 
vive. Or else the two parties, face to face, turn from the con- 
flict realizing that it solves nothing and content themselves with 
the retention of their former situations. They tolerate each 
other, not being able to conquer. The reciprocal tolerance 
which puts an end to religious wars is often of this nature. In 
all these cases, if the conflict of sentiments does not engender 
its natural consequences, that is not because it does not harbor 
them ; it is because it is hindered in their production. 

Moreover, they are useful as well as necessary. Besides aris- 
ing from the causes producing them, they contribute to their 
maintenance. All violent emotions really appeal to supple- 
mentary forces which come to render to the attacked sentiment 
the energy which the contradiction extorts from it. It has been 
sometimes said that choler was useless because it was only a 
destructive passion, but that is to see only one of its aspects. 
In fact, it consists of a superexcitation of latent and disposable 
forces which come to the aid of our personal sentiment in the 
face of the dangers by re-enforcing thenoKr In a state of peace, 

' the sentiment is not sufficiently armed for conflict. It would 
be in danger of succumbing if the passionate reserves were not 
available at the desired moment. Choler is nothing else than 



MECHANICAL SOLIDARITY 


99 


the mobilization of these reserves. It may even come about 
that the aid so evoked being more than needed, the discussion 
may have as its result the greater affirmation of our convictions, 
rather than their weakening. 

But we know what degree of energy a belief or a sentiment 
can take solely because it is felt by the same community of 
men in relation with one another ; the causes of this phenomenon 
are now well known.*^ Even as contrary states of conscience 
enfeeble themselves reciprocally, identical states of conscience, 
in exchanging, re-enforce one another. While the first detract, 
the second add. If anyone expresses before we do an idea 
which we have already thought of, the representation that we 
gain from it contributes to our own idea, superimposes itself, 
confounds itself with it, communicates to it whatever vitality 
it has. From this fusion grows a new idea which absorbs its 
predecessors and which, accordingly, is more vivid than each 
of tho^ taken separately. That is why, in large assemblies, an ' 
emotion can acquire such violence. It is because the vivacity 
with which it is produced in each conscience has repercussions' 
in all the others. It is not even necessary for us to experience 
a collective sentiment by ourselves, through our individual 
nature alone, for it to assume such an intensity for us, for what 
we add to it is after all a little thing. It suffices that we be not 
occupied refractorily to it, so that, penetrating from outside 
with a force that its origin gives it, it may impose itself upon us. 
Since, therefore, the sentiments which crime offends are, in any 
given society, the most universally collective that there arej^ 
since they are, indeed, particularly strong states of the pommon 
conscience, it is impossible for them to tolerate contradiction. 
Particularly if this contradiction is not purely theoretical, if it 
aflBirms itself not only by words, but by acts — when it is thus" 
carried to its maximum, we cannot avoid rising against it 
passionately. A simple restitution of the troubled-order would 
not suffice for us; we must have a more violent satisfaction. 
The force against which the crime comes is too intense to react' 

^ See Espinas, SociiUs animales, passim. 



100 


  


with very much moderation. Moreover, it cannot do so with- 
. out enfeebling itself, for it is thanks to the intensity of the 
Ireaction that it keeps alive and maintains itself with the same 
Jdegree of energy. 

We can thus explain a character of this reaction that has 
often seemed irrational. It is certain that at the bottom of 
the notion of expiation there is the idea of a satisfaction accorded 
to some power, real or ideal, which is superior to us. When we 
desire the repression of crime, it is not we that we desire to 
avenge personally, but to avenge something sacred which we 
feel more or less confusedly outside and above us. This some- 
thing we conceive of in different ways according to the time and 
the place. Sometimes it is a simple idea, as morality, duty; 
most often we represent it in the form of one or several con- 
crete beings: ancestors, divinity. That is why penal law is 
not alone essentially religious in origin, but indeed always ] 
retains a certain religious stamp. It is because the actS'that | 
it punishes appear to be attacks upon something transcendent, 
whether being or concept. It is for this very reason that we 
explain to ourselves the need for a sanction superior to a simple 
reparation which would content us in the order of purely human 
interests. 

Assuredly, this representation is illusory . It is ourselves 
that we, in a sense, avenge, ourselves that we satisfy, since it 
is within us and in us alone that the offended sentiments are 
found. But this illusion is necessary. Since these sentimenti0 
have exceptional force because of their collective o rigin, their 
universality, their permanence, and their intrinsic.,in,tensity, 
they separate themselves radically from the rest of our con- 
science whose states are much more feeble. They dominate . 
Us ; they are, so to speak, something superhuman, and, at tl^ 
same time, they bind us to objects which are outside of olur 
temporal life. They appear to us as an echo in us of a force 
which is foreign to us, and which is superior to that which we 
are. We are thus forced to project them outside ourselves, to 
attribute what concerns them to some exterior object’ We 



MECHANICAL SOLIDARITY 


101 


know today how partial alienations of personality thus come 
a^ut. This mirage is so inevitable that, under one form or 
another, it will ^row u ntil a repressive system appears. For, if 
this did not follow, we would not need collective sentiments of 
more than mediocre intensity, and in that case there would no 
longer be such a thing as punishment. Shall we say that the 
error will dissipate itself as soon as men are conscious of it ? But 
we hardly know that the sun is an immense globe ; we see it only 
as a disc of a few inches. T^is information can teach us t o 
i nter pret pur_ sensations,,; it can not change .tEem.” Besides, the 
error is only partial. _Since these sentiments are collective it 
is._n ot us they represent in us^ but society. Thus, in avenging 
them, it is surely society and not ourselves that we avenge, and 
moreover, it is something superior to the individual. It is 
thus wrong for us to seize upon this quasi-religious character of 
expiation and consider it as a sort of parasitic hypostatization. 
It is, on the contrary, an integral element of punishment. No 
doubt, it expresses its nature in a somewhat metaphorical 
manner, but the metaphor is not without truth. 

Moreover, we know that the penal reaction is not uniform in ' 
all cases since the emotions which determine it are not always 
the same. They are, in effect, more or less lively according to 
the_yiyjicity of the offended sentiment, and also according to 
the gravity of the offense suffered. A strong state reacts more 
than a feeble state, and two states of the same intensity react 
unequally according as they are more or less violently opposed. 
These variations are produced of necessity, and, moreover, they 
have their uses, since it is right that the appeal of forces be 
related to the importance of the danger. Were they too feeble, 
it would be insufficient ; too violent, it would be a useless loss. , 
^ce the gravity of the criminal act varies in relation to 
Yhe same factors, the proportionality that we observe every- 
where between crime and punishment establishes itself with 
mechanical spontaneity, without there being any necessity for 
making learned suppositions for its calculation. What gives 
crimes grades is also that which gives punishments grades. The 



102 


  


two scales cannot, consequently, fail to correspond, and this 
correspondence, to be necessary, must be useful at the same 
time. 

As for the social character of this reaction, it comes from the 
sc|Bial nature of the offended sentiments. Because they are 
found in all consciences, the infraction committed arouses in 
those who have evidence of it or who learn of its existence the 
same indignation. Everybody is attacked ; consequently, 
everybody opposes the attack. Not only is the reaction gen- 
eral, but it is collective, which is not the same thing. It is 
not produced isolatedly in each one, but with a totality and a 
unity, nevwtheless variable, according to the case. In effect, 
while opI)08ite sentiments oppose each other, similar sentiments 
attract each other, and as strongly do they attract as they 
themselves are intense. As contradiction is an exasperating 
danger, it adds to their attractive force. Never do we feel 
the need of the company of our compatriots so greatly as when 
we are in a strange country ; never does the believer feel so 
strongly attracted to his co-religionists as during periods of 
persecution. Of course, we always love the company of those 
who feel and think as we do, but it is with passion, and no longer 
solely with pleasure, that we seek it immediately after discussions 
where our common beliefs have been greatly combated. Crime 
brings together upright consciences and concentrates them. 
We have only to notice what happens, particularly in a small 
town, when some moral scandal has just been committed. 
They stop each other on the street, they visit each other, th^ 
seek to come together to talk of the event and to wax indignant 
in common. From all the similar impressions which are 
exchanged, from all the temper that gets itself expressed, there 
emerges a unique temper, more or less determinate according 
to the circumstances, which is everybody’s without being any-, 
body’s in particular. That is the public temper. 

Moreover, it alone has a specific use.' . In fact, the ^ntiments 
thus in question derive all their force they 



MECHANICAL SOLIDARITY 


103 

are common to everybody. T hey are strong be cause they are 
uhcontested . What adds the peculiar respect oT'wKich'fhey 
are the object is that they are universally respected. But 
crime is possible only if this respect is not truly universal. 
Consequently, it implies that they are not absolutely collective. 
Crime thus damages this unanimity which is the source of their 
auth ori ty. If, then, when it is committed, the conscienois 
which it offends do not unite themselves to give mutual evi- 
dence of their commimion, and recognize that the case is anom- 
aloqs, they would be permanently unsettled. They must 
re-enforce themselves by mutual assurances that they are always 
agreed. The only means for this is action in common. In 
short, since it is the common conscience which is attacked, it ^ 
must be that which resists, and accordingly the resistance must 
be collective.' 

It remains for us to say why it is organized. 

This last character will be explained if we realize that organ- 
ized repression is not 6pposed to diffuse repression, but is dis- 
tinguished from^ it only by a difference of degree ; the reaction 
has more unity. The very great intensity and the very definite 
nature of the sentiments which punishment properly so called 
avenges, clearly accounts for this more perfect unification.' If 
the traversed state is feeble, or if it is traversed only feebly, it can 
only determine a feeble concentration of outraged consciences. 
On the contrary, if it is strong, if the offense is serious, the whole 
group attacked masses itself in the face of the danger and 
unites, so to speak, in itself. They no longer are content with 
exchanging impressions when they find the occasion, of approach- 
ing each other here or there according to chance or the con- 
venience of meeting, but the agitation which has graduall}! 
gained ground violently pushes all those who are alike towards, 
one another and unites them in the same place. This material 
contraction of the aggregate, while making the mutual pene- 
■ tration of spirits more intimate, also makes all group-movements 
easier. The emotionaLreactions of which each conscience is 



104 ,   


the theatre are thus in most favorable condition for unification. 
If they were too diverse, however, whether in quality or in 
quantity, a complete fusion between these partially heterogene- 
ous and irreducible elements would be impossible. But we 
know that the sentiments which determine them are very 
definite, and consequently very uniform. They participate in 
the same uniformity, and, accordingly, quite naturally lose themselves in one another, compounding in a unique resultant 
which serves as their substitute and which is exercised, not by 
each alone, but by the social body so constituted. 

Many facts tend to prove that such was, historically, the 
genesis of punishment. We know that, in origin, the assembly 
of the people in their entirety functioned as the tribunal. If 
we look at the examples we just cited from the Pentateuch, we 
shall observe these things as we have' just described them. As 
soon as the news of a crime gets abroad, the people unite, and 
although the punishment may not be predetermined, the re- 
action is unified. In certain cases, indeed, the people them- 
selves executed the sentence collectively as soon as it had been 
pronounced.^ Thus, when the assembly became incarnated in 
the person of a chief, he became, totally or in part, the organ of 
penal reaction, and the organization guided itself conformably 
to the general laws of all organic development. i 

^ Thus, the nature of collective sentiments accounts for p iinish J 
ment, and, consequently, for crime. Moreover, we see anew 
that the power of reaction which is given over to governmental 
functionaries, once they have made their appearance, is only an 
emanation of that which has been diffuse in society since its 
bjrth. The one is only the reflex of the other. The extent 
of the first varies with that of the second. Let us add, more- 
over, that the institution of this power serves to maintain the 
common conscience itself. For it would be enfeebled if the 
organ which represents it did not partake of that which inspired 


" See above, p. 95, footnote 36. 

^ See Thonissen, Etudes, etc. II, pp. 30 and 232. The witnesses of a crime 
sometimes play a preponderant role in the execution. 



MECHANICAL SOLIDARITY 


' 105 


it and the particular authority that it exercises. But it cannot 
participate in it unless all the acts which offend it are oppp^ed 
and combatted as those which offend the collective conscience, 
even though the collective conscience is not directly affected. 

IV 

Thus, the analysis of punishment confirms our definition of 
crime. We beg an by establishing inductively that crime 
consisted essentially in an act contrary to .strong and defin ed 
states of the common consc ience. We have just seen that all 
the qualities of punishment ultimately deri ve from this nature 
of crime. That is because the rules that it sanctions express 
the most essential social likenesses. 

Thus we see what type of solidarity penal law symbolize s. ' 
Everybody knows that there is a soc ial cohesion whose cause 
lies in a certain conformity of all particu la r consciences^ a 
/iom mon type w hich is none other than the psyghig .type of 
society . In these conditions, not only are all the members of- 
t he group ind ividually attracted to one another because they 
resemble one an other, but also because they are joined to wha t 
i s the c ondition of exist ence of this collective type ; that is to 
* say7~t6 the society that they form by their union .'* Not only do 
citizens love ea^ othe r and seek each other outin preferenc e to 
stra^Srsrbut'theyTove their country. They will it as they will 
themselyesj hol<r'fo it durably and for prosperity, because, 
without it, a great part of their psychic lives would function 
poorly. Inversely, society holds to what they present in the 
way of fundamental resemblances because that is a condition of .• 
its cohesion. fl!'here are in us two consciences: one contains * 
states which are personal to each of us and which characterize 
us, while the states which comprehend the other are common 
to all society.^ The first represent only our individual per- 
sonality and constitute it ; the second represent the collective 

** To simplify the exposition, we hold that the individual appears only in one 
society. In fact, we take part in several groups and there are in us several col- 
lective consciences ; but this complication changes nothing with regard to the 
relation that we are now establishing. 




10l5 -   

type and, consequently, society, without which it would not 
e^sL When it is one of the elements of this latter which de- 
termines our conduct, it is not in view of our personal interest 
that we act, but we pursue collective ends. Although distinct, 
these two consciences arc linked one to the othe r, since, in sum, 
they^are only one, having one and the same organic substratum. 
They are thus solidary, from this results a solidarity s ui 
generis^ which , born of resemblances, direct ly links the i n- 
dividual wit h society.^ ' We shall be better able to show in the 
next chapter why ^ propose to call it mechanical. This 
^lidarit y dqe^not consist only i n a j eneral^nd inde termm ate 
attachment of the individual to the'gr^iTpVTOrals^^ the 
detail of his , movements harmpni6 usr“Tirshort, as these col- 
lective movements are always the same, they always produce 
the same effects. Consequently, each time that they are in 
play ;Vllls move spontaneously and together in the sam e sense. 

^It la this solidarity which repressive law expresses, at le ast, 
whatever there is vital in it.y IThe acts that it prohibits and 
C[ualifies as crimes are of two sorts. Either they directly 
manifest very violent dissemblance between the agent who 
accomplishes them and the collective type, or else they offend 
the organ of the common conscience . ) In one case as in the other, 
the force that is offended'by the crime and which suppresses'it 
is thus the same. It is a product of the most essential social 
likenesses , and it has for its effect the maintenance of the social 
cohesion which results from these likenesses. It is thisTorce 
which penal law protects against all enfeeblement, both in de- 
manding from each of us a minimum of resemblances without 
which the individual would be a menace to the unity of the 
social body, and in imposing upon us the respect for the symbol 
which expresses and summarizes these resemblances at the 
same time that it guarantees them. 

We thus explain why acts have been so often reputed crim- 
inal and punished as such without, in themsel ves, bei ng evil for 
society. That is, just as the individual tj^, the collective 
type is formed from very diverse causes and even from fortuitous 








MECHANICAL SOLIDARITY 


107 


combinations. Produced through historical development, it 
carries the mark of circumstances of every kind which society 
has gone through in its history. It would be miraculous, then, 
if everything that we find there were adjusted to some useful 
end. But it cannot be that elements more or less munerous 
were there introduced without having any relation to social 
utility. Among the inclinations and tendencies that the in- 
dividual has received from his ancestors, or which he has formed 
himself, many are certainly of no use, or cost more than they 
are worth. Of course, the majority are not harmful, for being, 
under such conditions, does not mean activity. But there are 
some of them remaining without any use, and those whose 
services are most incontestable often have an intensity which 
*has no relation to their utility, because it comes to them, in 
part, from other causes. The case is the same with collective 
passions. All the acts which offend them are not dangerous 
i n themselves, or, at least, are not as dangerous as they a re 
made out to be. But, the reprobation of wh i ch these acts 
"are the object still has reason for existing, whatever the origin 
of the sentiments involved, once they are made part of a coll eo- 
t ive type, and especially if they are essential elements, eve ry- 
thing which contributes to disturb them, at the same time 
disturbs social cohesion and compromises society. It was not 
at all useful for them to be born, but once they have endured, 
it becomes necessary that they persist in spite of their irra- 
tionality. That is why it is good, in general, that the acts 
which offend them be not tolerated. * Of course, reasoning in 
the abstract, we may well show that there is no reason for a 
society to forbid the eating of such and such a meat, in itself 
inoffensive. But once the horror of this has become an integraP 
part of the common conscience, it cannot disappear without 
a social link being broken, and that is what sane consciences 
obscurely feel.^ 

That does-not fnean that it is necessary to conserve a penal rule because, 
at some given moment, it corresponded to some collective sentiment. It has a 
raison d*itre only if this latter is living and energetic. If it has disappeared or 
been enfeebled, nothing is vainer or worse than trying to keep it alive artificially 





108   

Cxhe case is the same with punishment. Although it proceeds 
from a quite mechanical reaction, from movements which are 
passionate and in great part non-reflective, it does play a useful 
role. Only this role is hot'where we ordinarily look,iQr it. It 
does not serve, or else only serves quite secondarily, in correct- 
ing the culpable or in intimidating possible followers. From 
this point of view, its efficacy is justly doubtful and, in any case, 
mediocreT^Its true function is to maintain soci al cohe sion 
intact, while ifiaintaiamg all Tts vitality In 'the uuiiniiuu con- 
sciggftgr ~~ Benied 86 categorically, it vTOntd necessarily lose its 
energy, if- an emotional reaction of the community did not come 
to compensate its loss, and it would result in a breakdown of 
social solidarity. It is necessary, then, that it be affirmed 
forcibly at the very moment when it is contradicted, and the 
only means of affirming it is to express the unanimous aversion 
which the crime continues to inspire, by an authentic act which 
can consist only in suffering inflicted upon the agent. JJhus, 
while being the necessary product of the causes which engender 
it, this suffering is not a gratuitous cruelty. It is the sign 
which witnesses that collective sentiments are always collective, 
that the communion of spirits in the same faith rests on a solid 
foundation, and accordingly, that it is repairing the evil which 
the crime inflicted upon society. That is why we are right in 
saying that the criminal must suffer in proportion to his crime, 
why theories which refuse to punishment any expiatory char- 
acter appear as so many spirits subversive of the social order. 
It is because these doctrines could be practiced only in a society 
where the whole common conscience would be nearly gone. 
Without this necessary satisfaction, what we call the moral 
conscience could not be conserved. We can thus say without 
paradox that punishment is above all designed to act upon 
upright people, for, since it serves to heal, the wounds made 
upon collective sentiments, it can fill this role only where these 


or by force. It can even be that it was necessary to combat a practice which was 
common, but is no longer so, and opposes the establishment of new and neces- 
sary practices. But we need not enter into this casuistical problem* 



MECHANICAL SOLIDARITY 


109 


sentiments exist, and commensurately with their vivacity. 
Of course, by warning already disturbed spirits of a new en- 
feeblement of the collective soul, it can even stop attacks from 
multiplying, but this result, however useful, is only a particu- 
lar counter blow. In short, in order to form an exact idea 
of punishment, we must reconcile the two con traHinfnry 
ories which dea l w ith it : that which sees it as expiation, and 
that which makes it a weapon for social defense,. It is certain 
that it functions for the protection of society, but that is because 
it is expiatory. Moreover, if it must be expiatory, that does 
not mean that by some mystical virtue pain compensates for 
the error, but rather that it can p roduce a socially useful cfiFoc t 
o nly under this c^dition. ’**’ . ^ ‘ . 

The result of this chapter is this there exists a social solidar- \ 
if^which comes from a certain number of Sates of conscience 
which are common to all the members of the same society 
(This is what repressive law materially represents, at least in 
so far as it is essential. The part that it plays in the general 
i ntegration of so ciety evidently depends upon the greater or 
l esser extent of the s ocial li fe whi ch the common consc ience 
embraces and r egula tes. The greater the diversity of relations 
wherein the latter makes its action felt, the more also it creates 
links which attach the individual to the group ; the more, con- 
sequently, social cohesion derives completely from this source 
and bears its mark. But the number of these relations is itself 
proportional to that of the repressive rules. In determining 
what fraction of the juridical system penal law represents, we, 
at the same time, measure the relative importance of this soli- 
darity. It is true that in such a procedure we do not take into 
account certain elements of the collective conscience which, 
because of their smaller power or their indeterminateness, remain 
foreign to repressive law while contributing to the assurance of 

In saying that punishment, such as it is, has a raison d'Hre, we do not intend 
to suggest that it is perfect and incapable of betterment. It is very evident, on 
the contrary, that having been produced, in great part, by very mechanical 
causes, it can be but very imperfectly adjusted to its role. The matter is only a 
question of justification in the large. 



no 


  


social harmony. These are the ones protected by punishments 
which are merely diffuse. But the same is the case with other 
parts of law. There is not one of them which is not comple- 
mented by custom, and as there is no reason for supposing that 
the relation of law and custom is not the same in these different 
spheres, this elimination is not made at ihe risk of having to 
alter the results of our comparison. / / 



CHAPTER THREE 


ORGANIC SOLIDARITY DUE TO THE 
DIVISION OF LABOR 

I 

The very nature of the restitutive sanction suffices to show 
that the social solidarity to which this type of law corresponds 
is of a totally different kind. 

^ ' What distinguishes this sanction is that it i s not expiatory. 
\but consists of a simple return in state. Sufferance propor- 
tionate to the misdeed is not inflicted on the one who has vio- 
lated the law or who disregards it; he is simply sentenced to 
comply with it..» I f certain things were done, the judge rein- 
states them as they would have been. He speaks of law ; he 
says nothing of punishment. Damage-interests have no pen al 
character ; they are only a means of reviewing the past in 
order to reinstate it, as far as possible, to its normal form. 
Tarde, it is true, has tried to find a sort of civil penality in the 
payment of costs by the defeated party.* But, taken in ftiis 
sense, the word has only a metaphorical value. ^For punish- 
ment to obtain, there would at least have to be some relation 
between the punishment and the misdeed, and for that it would 
be necessary for the degree of gravity of the misdeed to be 
firmly established, In fact, however, he who loses the liti- 
gation pays the damages even when his intentions were pure, 
even when his ignorance alone was his culpability. The reasons 
for this rule are different from those offered by Tarde : given 
the fact that justice is not rendered gratuitously, it appears 
equitable for the damages to be paid by the one who brought 
them into being. Moreover, it is possible that the prospect of 

* Tarde, CriminaliU comparie, p. 113. 

Ill 




112 


  


such costs may stop the rash pleader, but that is not sufficientY 
to constitute punishment. The fear of ruin which ordinarily 
follows indolence or negligence may keep the negotiant active 
and awake, though ruin is not, in the proper sense of the word, 
the penal sanction for his misdeeds. 

^Neglect of these rules is not even punished diffusely. The/ 
pfeader who has lost in litigation is not disgraced, his honor isj 
not put in question. We can even imagine these rules being 
other than they are without feeling any repugnance , j The 
idea of tolerating murder arouses us, but we quite easily accept 
modification of the right of succession, and can even conceive 
of its possible abolition. It is at least a question which we do 
not refuse to discuss, j Indeed, we admit with impunity that the 
law of servitudes or that of usufructs may be otherwise organ- 
ized, that the obligations of vendor and purchaser may be 
determined in some other manner, that administrative functions 
may be distributed according to different principles. As these 
prescriptions do not correspond to any sentiment in us, and as 
we generally do not scientifically know the reasons for their 
existence, since this science is not definite, they have no roots 
in the majority of us. jOf course, there are exceptions. We 
do not tolerate the idea that an engagement contrary to custom 
or obtained either through violence or fraud can bind the con- 
tracting parties. Thus, when public opinion finds itself in the 
presence of such a case, it shows itself less indifferent than we 
have just now said, and it increases the legal sanction by its 
censure. The different domains of the moral life are not 
radically separated one from another; they are, rather, con-jj 
tinuous, and, accordingly, there are among them marginaj| 
resins where different characters are found at the same time./ 
However, the preceding proposition remains true in the gret^ 
majority of cases. t4t is prodC; that the rules with a rpsUtii- 


tive Sanction eithet do not totally derive from the collerave 


nscience. or are only feeble states of it. Repiessive law corre^ 


sponds to the heatt', th^'^ntie of the common conscienceT~laws 


urelv moral are a part less central : finally, restitutiveiaw is 







ORGANIC SOLIDARITY 


113 


born in very ex>centric regions whence iL^j^reads further. / The 
more it becomes truly itself, the more removed it is. 

/This characteristic is, indeed, made manifest by the manner oi 
its functioning, ^^ ^hile repressive law tends to remajn diJEti^ 
within society, r^tifutive 1^ "^e^^ organs which are mo re 
and more specialized: consular tribunals, councils of arbitra - 
tionTa^rnmistr of every sort. Even in its most 

general part, that which pertains to civil law, it is exercised 
only through particular functionaries : magistrates, lawyers, etc., 
who have become apt in this role because of very special training 
w/But , although these rules are more or less outside the colled 
tive c^science, they are not interested solely in individual^ 
If this were so, restitutive law would have nothing in common 
with social solidarity, for the relations that it regulates would 
bind individuals to one another without binding them to society. 
They would simply be happenings in private life, as friendly 
relations are. But society is far from having no hand in this 
sphere of juridical life. It is true that, generally, it does not 
intervene of itself and through its own movements ; it must be 
solicited by the interested parties. But, in being called forth, 
its intervention is none the less the essential cog in the machine, 
since it alone makes it function. It propounds the law through 
the organ of its representatives. 

It has been contended, however, that this role has nothing 
properly social about i ^, but reduces itself to that of a conciliat or 
pf private interests ; that, consequently, any individual can fill 
it, and that, if society is in charge of it, it is only for commodious 
reasons. But nothing is more incorrect than considering so ciety 
as a sort of third-party arbitrat or. When it is led to intervene^ 
it is not to put to rights some individual interests. It doe^ 
not seek to discover what may be the most advantageous soluf 
tion for the adversaries and does not propose a compromise foi* 
them. Rather, it applies to the particular case which is sub- 
mitted to it general and traditional rules of law. But law is^^ 
above all, a social thing and has a totally different object than 
the interest of the pleaders. The judge who examines a request 








114 


  


(fcMT' (Jiyorce is not concerned with knowing whether this sepa- 
"ration is truly desirable for the married parties, but rather 
^.whether the causes which are adduced come under one of the 
‘categories foreseen by the law. 

But better to appreciate the importance of social action, we 
must observe it, not only at the moment when the sanction is 
applied, when the troubled relation is adjudicated, but also 
when it is instituted. 

It is, in effect, necessary either to establish or to modify 
a number of juridical relations which this law takes care of and 
which the consent of the interested parties suffices neither to 
create nor to change. Such are those, notably, which concern 
the state of the persons. Although marriage is a contract, the 
married persons can neither form it nor break it at their pleasure. 
It is the same with all the other domestic relations and, with 
stronger reason, with all those which administrative law regu- 
lates. ■ It is true that obligations properly contractual can be 
entered into and abrogated solely through the efforts of those 
'desiring them. But it must not be forgotten that, if the con- 
tract has the power to bind, it is society which gives this power to 
_it. Suppo^ that society did not sanction the obligations con- 
tracted for. They become simply promises which foave jaa, 
more than moral authority.* ' Every contract thus supposes; 
IKaT behind the parties impHcated in it there is society very 
ready to intervene in order to gain respect for the engagements 
which have been made. ^Moreover, it lends this obligatory 
force only to contracts which have in themselves a social value, 
which is to say, those which conform to the rules of law. We 
shall see that its intervention is sometimes even more positive. 
It is present in all relations which restitutive law determines, 
even in those which appear most completely private, and its 
presence, though not felt, at least in normal circumstances, is 
none the less essential.* 

< And even this moral authority comes from eustom, which is to say, from 
society. 

* We must restrict ourselves to general indications, common to all the forms 
of restitutive law. Otherwheres will be found (Book I, ch. vii) numerous proofs 



•RGANIC SOLIDARITY 


115 


^ince rules with restitutive sanctions are strangers to the 
conimoh" conscience, the relations that they determine are not 
those which attach themselves indistinctly everywhere. „Th^at 
Us to say, they are established immediately, not between the 
individual and society, but between restricted, special parties in 
i^ciety whom they bind. But, since society is not absent, it 
imust be more or less directly interested, it must feel the reper- 
cussions. Thus, according to the force with which society 
feels them, it intervenes more or less concomitantly and more 
or less actively, through the intermediary of special organs 
charged with representing it. These relations are, then, quite 
different from those which repressive law regulates, for the 
•latter attach the particular conscience to the collective con- 
‘science directly and without mediation ; that is, the individual 
ito society. 

' ^ut these relations can take two very different forms : some- 
times they are negative and reduce themselves to pure absten- 
tion; sometimes they are positive and co-operative. To the 
two classes of rules which determine these, there correspond 
two sorts of social solidauity which we must distinguish. 

II 

The negative relation which may serve as a type for the others 
is the one which unites the thing to the person. 

“ Things, to be sure, form part of society just as persons, and 
they play a specific role in it. Thus it is necessary that their 
relations with the social organism be determined. We may 
then say that there is a solidarity of things whose nature is 
quite special and translates itself outside through juridical con- 
sequences of a very particular character. 

-^The jurisconsults distinguish two kinds of rights: to one 
they give the name real; to the oIKct, that of personal. The 
right of property, thfe pledge, pertains to the first type; the 

of this truth for the part of this law which corresponds to the solidarity which 
the division of labor produces. 



116 


  


rigM of credit to the second. What characterizes real rights is 
that only they give a prefe rential and successoral right. Thus, 
“the right that I have in the thing deludes anyone el% from com- 
ing to usurp what is mine./ If, for example, a thing has been 
successively hypothecated to two creditors, the second pledge 
' can in no wise restrain the rights of the first,' Moreover, if my 
debtor alienates the thing in which I have a right of hsrpothe- 
cation, that is in no wise attacked, but the third party is held 
either to pay me or to lose what he has acquired. But for 
this to come about, it is necessary that the bond of law unite 
me directly and without the mediation of any other person to 
the thing determinate of my juridical personality. This 
privileged situation is, then, the consequence of the solidarity 
proper to things. On the other hand, when the right is personal, 
the person who is obligated to me can, in contracting new obliga- 
tions, give me co-creditors whose right is equal to mine, and 
although I may have as security all the goods of my debtor, if 
he alienates them, they come out of my security and patrimony. 
The reason for this is that there is no special relation between 
these goods and me, but between the Mrson of their owner and 
my own person.* ^ 

. /Thus we see what this real solidarity consists of ; it directly 
links thinp to persons, but not pert^s among themselves. 
Tn a strict sense, one can exercise a real right by thinking one 
is alone in the world, without reference to other men. Con- 
sequ'ently, since it is only through the medium of persons that 
I things are integrated in society, the solidarity resulting from 
jt^s integration is wholly negative. It does not lead wills to 
move toward common ends, but merely makes things gravitate 
around wills in orderly fashion. Because real rights are thus 
' limited, they do not cause conflicts ; hostility is precluded, but 
I there is no active coming together, no consensus. Suppose an 
agreement of this kind were as perfect as possible ; the society 

* It has sometimes been said that the quality of fatherhood, that of son, etc. 
were the object of real rights. (See Ortolan, InstitiUa, I, p. 660.) But these 
qualities are only abstract symbols of divers rights, some real (right of father 
over fortune of his minor children, for example), others personal. 



ORGANIC SOLIDARITY 


117 


in which it exists — if it exists alone — will resemble an im- 
mense constellation where each star moves in its orbit without 
concern for the movements of neighboring stars. Such soli- 
darity does not make the elements that it relates at all capable 
of acting together; it contributes nothing to the unity of the 
social body. 

^^rom the preceding, it is easy to determine what part of res- 
titutive law this solidarity corresponds to ; it is the body of 
re^ jights. But from the definition which has been given of 
them, it comes about that the law of property is the most per- 
fect example of them. In effect, the most complete relation 
which can exist between a thing and a person is that which 
makes the former entirely dependent upon the latter./ But this 
relation is itself very complex, and the different elements which 
go to make it up can become the object of many secondary real 
rights as well, such as usufruct, servitudes, usage, and habitar 
tion. We can then summarily say that real rights comprise the 
' law of property in its different forms (literary, artistic, industrial, > 
mobile, immobile) and its different modalities such as the ^ 
second book of the French Civil Code regulates. In addition 
to this book, the Fren^law recognizes four other real rights, 
but they are only auxiliary and eventual substitutes for personal 
rights : these are lien, pledge, gift, and hypothecation (articles 
2071-2203). It is proper to add to them all that relates to the 
law of succession, wills, and, consequently, absence, since it 
creates, when declared, a sort of provisory succession. In 
effect, an inheritance is a thing or group of things in which the 
inheriting parties or the legatees have a real right, which may bos, 
acquired, ipso facto upon the decease of the owner, or may be 
‘available only by judicial act, as happens with indirect heirs and ■ 
legatees of particular station. In all these cases, the juridical 
relation is directly established, not between one person and 
another, but between a person and a thing. The case is the 
same with testamentary donation, which is only the exercise of 
the real right which the owner has over his goods, or at least 
that portion of them which are disposable. 



118 


  


V But there are relations of persons to persons which, though 
not real, are nevertheless as negative as the preceding and 
express a solidarity of the same nature. 

In the first place, there are those which the exercise of actual 
real rights occasion. It is inevitable that the functioning of 
these should sometimes call forth the very persons of their de- 
tainers. For example, when a thing is added to another, the 
one who is reputedly owner of the first by that act becomes 
the owner of the second ; only “he must pay to the other the. 
value of the thing appropriated” (article 566). This obligation 
is evidently personal. Likewise, every owner of a separating 
wall who wishes to raise it must pay to the co-proprietor the 
loss accruing from the change (article 658). An individual lega- 
tee is obliged to address himself to the residuary legatee in order 
to obtain the deliverance of the thing bequeathed, although 
he may have the right to it from the, death of the testator 
(article 1014). But the solidarity which these relations express 
does not differ from that of which we have just been speaking. 
^They have been set up only to repair or prevent an injury. 
If the detainer of each real right could always exercise it with- 
out ever going beyond its limits, each would remain unto him- 
self, and there would be no place for any juridical commerce. 
But, in fact, it endlessly happens that the different rights im- 
pinge on one another so that we cannot invoke one without en- 
‘croaching upon others which limit it. For instance, the thing 
in which I have a right is found in someone else’s hands ; such 
is the case in a legacy. In another case, I cannot enjoy my 
right without harming some one else; such is the case with 
certain servitudes. These relations are then necessary in re- 
pairing wrong, if it has been done, or in preventing it ; but there* 
is nothing positive about them. / They do not cause the people 
whom they put in contact with one another to concur ; they do 
(,not demand any co-operation; but they simply restore or 
maintain, in the new conditions which are produced, this 
negative solidarity whose circumstances have troubled its 
functioning. Far from uniting, their task is rather to separate 



ORGANIC SOLIDARITY 


119 


I what has been united through the force of things, to re-establish 
the limits which have been transgressed and replace each in its 
proper sphere. They are so well identified with the relations 
of a thing to a person that the codifiers did not make a place 
apart for them, but have treated them just as they treated real 
rights. , 

Finally, the obligations which arise from a delict or quasi- 
delict have exactly the same character.'' In truth, they force 
each to repair the damage which his fault has caused to the 
legitimate interests of another. They are thus personal, but 
the solidarity to which they correspond is evidently wholly 
negative, since they consist, not in serving, but in not harming. 
The link whose break they sanction is altogether external. 
The only difference there is between these relations and the 
preceding is that, in one case, the break comes from a fault, and 
in the other, from circumstances determined and foreseen by 
the law. But the troubled order is the same ; it results, not in 
concurrence, but in pure abstention.® Moreover, those rights 
whose violation gives rise to these obligations are themselves 
real, for I am owner of my body, of my health, of my honor, of 
my reputation, in the same respect and in the same manner as 
I own the material things which are mine. 

In short, the rules relative to real rights and to personal 
relations which are established in their turn form a definite 
system which has as its function, not to attach different parts of 
society to one another, but, on the contrary, to put them out- 
side one another, to mark cleanly the barriers which separate 
them. They do not correspond to a positive social link. The 
very expression of negative solidarity which we have used is 
not perfectly exact. It is not a true solidarity, having its own 
existence and its special nature, but rather the negative side 

‘ Art. 1382-1386 of the French Civil Code. — One might join together here 
the articles on the repetition of the improper. 

• The contracting party that fails to keep his engagements is, himself, held 
to indemnify the other party. But, in this case, the damage-interests serve as 
sanction with a positive link. It is not for having erred that the violator of the 
contract pays, but for not having carried out the stated promise. 



120 


DIVISION 0# LABOR IN SOCIETY 


of every species of solidarity. The first condition of total 
coherence is that the parties who compose it should not inter- 
fere with one another through discordant movements. But 
this external accord does not make for cohesion; on the con- 
trary, it supposes it. Negative solidarity is possible only 
where there exists some other of a positive nature, of which 
it is at once the resultant and the condition. 

In effect, the rights of individuals, as much in themselves 
as in things, can be determined only thanks to some compromise 
and some mutual concessions, for everything which is ac- 
corded to some is necessarily abandoned by the others. It has 
sometimes been said that we can deduce the normal extent of 
the development of the individual from the concept of human 
personality (Kant), or from the notion of the individual organ- 
ism (Spencer). That is possible, although the rigor of the 
rationalizations may be very contestable. In any event, what 
is certain is that in historical reality it is not on these abstract 
considerations that the moral order has been founded. In factp 
in order that man might recognize the rights of others, not 
only logically, but in the practical workaday world, it was 
necessary that he consent to limit his rights, and, consequently, 
this mutual limitation could be made only in a spirit of agree- 
ment and accord. But, if we suppose a multitude of individuate 
without previous links between them, what reason could there 
have been to induce them to make these reciprocal sacrifices? 
The need for living in peace ? But peace by itself is not a thing 
more desirable than war. War has its interest and its ad- 
vantages. Have there not been some peoples and, at all times, 
some individuals in whom it was a passion? The instincts to 
which it responds are not less strong than those which peace 
satisfies. Doubtless, fatigue can for a time put an end to 
hostilities, but this bare armistice cannot be more durable 
than the temporary lassitude which occasions it. The case is 
even stronger in respect of the conclusions due solely to the 
triumph of force ; they are as provisory and precarious as the 
treaties which put an end to international wars. Men have 



ORGANIC SOLIDARITY 


121 


need of peace only as they are already united by some tie of 
sociability. In this case, the sentiments which incline them’*' 
towards each other quite naturally moderate the urgings of 
egoism; and, from another standpoint, the society which 
envelops them, not being able to live except on condition of 
not being at every instant embroiled in conflicts, urges on them, 
and obliges them to make, necessary concessions. 

It is true that we sometimes see independent societies agreeing 
to determine their respective rights ov^er things, that is to say,t 
their territories. But really, the extreme instability of these 
relations is the best proof that negative solidarity cannot alon^ 
suffice. If today, among cultivated peoples, it seems to have 
more force, if that part of international law which regulates 
what we might call the real rights of European societies has 
more authority than heretofore, it is because the different 
nations of Europe are much less independent of one another, 
because, in certain respects, they are all part of the same society, 
still incoherent, it is true, but becoming more and more self- 
conscious. What we call the equilibrium of Europe is a begin- 
ning of the organization of this society. 

It is customary to distinguish carefully justice from charity; 
that is, simple respect for the rights of another from every act 
which goes beyond this purely negative virtue. We see in the 
two sorts of activity two independent layers of morality: 
justice, in itself, would only consist of fundamental postulates ; 
charity would be the perfection of justice. The distinction is 
so radical that, according to partisans of a certain type of 
morality, justice alone would serve to make the functioning of 
social life good ; generous self-denial would be a private virtue, 
worthy of pursuit by a particular individual, but dispensable 
to society. Many even look askance at its intrusion into public 
life. We can see from what has preceded how little in accord 
with the facts this conception is. ■ In reality, for men to recog- 
nize and mutually guarantee rights, they must, first of all, love 
each other, they must, for some reason, depend upon each 
other and on the society of which they are a part. Justice 



122   

is full of charity, or, to employ our expressions, negative solidai^> 
ity is only an emanation from some other solidarity ^hose 
nature' is'pdative. It is the repercussion in the spheri'oFfeal 
rights of social sentiments which come from another source. 
There is nothing specific about it, but it is the necessary ac- 
companiment of every type of solidarity. It is met with force- 
fully wherever men live a common life, and that comes from 
the division of social labor or from the attraction of like for likea.. 

Ill 

If, from restitutive law, we take away the rules of which 
we have just spoken, what remains constitutes a system, no 
less definite, which comprises domestic law, contract-law, 
commercial law, procedural law, administrative law, and con- 
stitutional law. The relations which are regulated by it are of 
a totally different character from the preceding ones; they 
express a positive, imion, a co-operation which deriYes,_m es- 
sentials, from the division of labor. 

The questions which domestic law resolves can be put under 
two headings : 

1. How are the different domestic functions assigned? 
What is it to be a husband, a father, a legitimate child, a 
guardian? 

2. What is the normal type for these functions and their 
relations? 

It is to the first of these questions that the dispositions 
respond which determine the qualities and conditions required 
to contract marriage, the necessary formalities for the validation 
of marriage, the conditions of legitimate filiation, natural and 
adoptive, and the manner in which a guardian must be chosen. 

It is, on the other hand, to the second question that the 
chapters respond which govern the respective rights and duties 
of the couple, the state of their relations in case of divorce, 
annulment of marriage, separation from bed and board, the 
'pairia potestas, the effects of adoption, the administration of 
guardianship and its relation with the ward, the role of the 



ORGANIC SOLIDARITY 


123 


family council as against the first and the second, and the role 
of the relatives in cases of interdiction and judicial counsel. 
\^Thus this part of civil law has for its object the determi- 
nation of the manner in which the different familial functions 
are distributed, and what they ought to be in their mutual- 
relations; that is to say, it expresses the particular solidarity 
which unites the members of a family in accordance with tha- 
division of domestic labor, y It is true that we are not accus- 
tomed to view the family in this light. We believe, most often, 
that what brings about its cohesion is exclusively the commu- 
nity of sentiments and beliefs. There are, to be sure, so many 
things common to members of the familial group that the 
special character of tasks which devolve upon each of them 
easily escapes us. That is what made Comte say that the 
domestic union excluded “all thought of direct and continuous 
co-operation to a definite goal.” ^ But the juridical organization 
of the family, of which we have just related the essential lines, 
shows the reality of these functional differences and their im- 
portance. The history of the family, from its very origins, is 
only an uninterrupted movement of dissociation in the course of 
which diverse functions, at first undivided and confounded one 
with another, have been little by little separated, constituted 
apart, apportioned among the relatives according to sex, age, re- 
lations of dependence, in a way to make each of them a special 
functionary of domestic society.® Far from being only an acces- 
sory and secondary phenomenon, this division of familial labor, 
on the contrary, dominates the entire development of the family. 

The relation of the division of labor to contractrlaw.ia. not, 
less distin ct. !, 

f In effecti^ the_cpntract is, por exceZZence, the juridical ex4 
- pression of co-oper ation. There are, to be sure, contracts of 
Hbenevolence, where only one of the parties is bound. If I 
give something unconditionally to somebody else, if I gratui- 

’ Cours de philosophie positive, IV, p. 419. 

* For further consideration on this point, see Book I, ch. vii of this work. 



124 


  


tously take upon myself a trust or a commission, there result 
precise and determined obligations which I must perform. 
Properly speaking, however, there is no union between the con- 
tracting parties, since there are duties on one side only. But 
co-operation is not absent from the case ; it is merely gratuitous 
oFunilateral. What is a gift, for example, but an exchange 
without reciprocal obligations? These types of contracts are, 
then, only a variety of contracts truly co-operative. 

Moreover, they are very rare, for it is very exceptional for 
acts of kindness to come under legal surveillance. As for the 
other contracts, which constitute the great majority, the obli- 
gations to which they give rise are correlative or reciprocal 
obligations, or events already effectuated. The involvement 
of one party results either from involvement assumed by the 
other, or from some service already rendered by the latter.® 
But this reciprocity is possible only where there is co-operation, 
and that, in its turn, does not come about without the division. 
' of labor. To co-operate, in short, is to participate in a common 
task. If this is divided into tasks qualitatively similar, but 
mutually indispensable, there is a simple division of labor of 
the first degree. If they are of a different character, there is a 
compound division of labor, specialization properly called. 

This latter form of co-operation is, moreover, in great part, 
that which contract most generally expresses. The only one 
which has any other signification is the contract of society, and 
perhaps also the marriage-contract, in so far as it determines 
the contributive part of married people in the expenses of the 
household. Still, for this to be so, the contract of society must 
put all those associated on the same level, their shares must be 
identical, and their functions the same. Such a case is never 
exactly presented in matrimonial relations, in the conjugal 
division of labor. Over against these rare types, let us put the 
multiplicity of contracts which have as their object the ad- 
justment of special, different functions to one another: con- 
tracts between buyer and seller, contracts of exchange, contracts 

* For example, in the case of a loan at interest. 



ORGANIC SOLIDARITY 


125 


between employers and workers, between tenant and land- 
lord, between lender and borrower, between depositary and de- 
positor, between inn-keeper and traveler, between principal and 
agent, between the creditor and the security of the debtor. In 
general fashion, the contract is the symbol of exc hange. Thus, 
■ Spencer has not without justice qualified as a physiological 
contract the exchange of materials which is made at every 
instant between the different organs of the living body.‘® 
(Thus it is clear that exchange always presupposes some division 
^ labor more or less developed. It is true that the contracts 
of which we have just been speaking still have a somewhat 
general character. But one must not forget that law deals 
only in generalities, in the great lines of social relations, those 
which are found identical in the different spheres of collective 
life. Thus, each of these types of contract implies a multitude 
of others, more particular, of which it is the common imprint 
and which it regulates in one sweep, but where the relations 
established are between very special functions. Thus, in 
spite of the relative simplicity of this scheme, it suffices to 
make clear the extreme complexity of the facts which it en- 
compasses. 

^>-^his specialization of function is, indeed, more immediately 
apparent in the commercial code which regulates, pre-eminently, 
the contracts special to business : contracts between commis- 
sion-agent and principal, between carrier and shipper, between 
the holder of a letter of exchange and the drawer, between 
the owner of a ship and his creditors, between the first and the 
captain and crew, between the granter of a charter and the 
charterer, between the lender and the borrower in gross, be- 
tween the insurer and the insured. Even here, however, there 
is a large gap between the generality relative to the juridical 
prescriptions and the diversity of the particular functions 
whose relations they govern, as the important place given to 
custom in commercial law amply proves. 


>* In his work on ethics. 



126   

When the commercial code does not regulate contracts 
properly speaking, it determines what certain special functions 
ought to be, as those of the agent of exchange, of the broker, 
of the captain, of the adjudicator in case of bankruptcy, in 
order to assure the solidarity of all the parties involved in the 
commercial field. 

Procedural law — which takes care of criminal, civil, or com- 
mercial procedure — plays the same role in the judicial scheme. 
The sanctions of juridical rules of all sorts can be applied only 
thanks to the interplay of a certain number of functions, of 
magistrates, of defense counsel, of prosecutors, of jurors, of 
plaintiffs and defendants, etc. Procedure fixes the way in 
which they must come into play and relate themselves. It 
announces what they must be and what part each plays in the 
general life of the organ. 

It seems to us that in a rational classification of juridical 
rules procedural law ought to be considered only as a variety 
of administrative law. We do not see any radical difference 
separating the administration of justice from the rest of ad- 
ministration. Whatever it may be in this view, administrative 
law, properly called thus, regulates functions badly defined as 
administrative, “ just as the preceding does for judicial func- 
tions. It determines their normal type and their relations 
either one with another, or with the diffuse functions of society. 
We would only have to drop a certain number of rules which 
are generally put under this rubric, because they have a penal 
character.^* Finally, constitutional law does the same thing 
for governmental functions. 

Some may be astonished to see united in the same class 
administrative and political law and what we ordinarily call 

“ We are keeping the expression currently employed, but it will have to be 
defined, and we do not feel in position to do that. It seems to us, in the large, 
that these functions are those which are immediately placed under the action 
of governmental centres. But many distinctions would be necessary. 

And also those concerning the real rights of moral persons in the adminis- 
trative order, for the relations they determine are negative. 



ORGANIC SOLIDARITY 


127 


private law. But, first of all, this unification imposes itself 
if we take as basis for the classification the nature of sanctions, 
and it does not seem to us possible to do otherwise if we wish 
to proceed scientifically. Moreover, in order completely to 
separate the two sorts of law, it would be necessary to admit 
that there is really a private law, whereas we believe that all 
law is public, because all law is social. All the functions of 
society _are socia l, as all, the functions of the organism are 
organic. Economic functions have the same character as the 
others. Moreover, even among the most diffuse, there are none 
which are not, in greater or lesser degree, under the supervision 
of action by governmental bodies. From this point of view, 
there is only a difference of degree between them. 

. ’ ^ 
^To sum up : the relations governed by co-operative law with; 
r estituti ye s anct ions and the solidarity which they express, 
result from the division of social labor. We have explained, 
moreover, that, in general, co-operative relations do not convey 
other sanctions. In fact, it is in the nature of special tasks to 
escape the action of the collective conscience, for, in order for 
a to be the object of c ommon sentiments^ the first con- 

dition is that it be common, that is to say, that it be present 
in all consciences and that all can represent it in one and the 
same manner. To be sure, in so far as functions have a certain 
generality, everybody can have some idea of them. But the 
more specialized they are, the more circumscribed th e juimfegi* 
of those cognizant of ea ch of th em. Con^guently^the xnore 
marginal they are to the common conscience’ The rules which 
determine them cannot have the superior force, the tran- 
scendent authority which, when offended, demands expiation. 
It is also from opinion that their authority comes, as is the case 
with penal rules, but from an opinion localized in restricted 
regions of society. 

Moreover, even in the special circles where they apply and! 
where, consequently, they are represented in people, they do 
not correspond to very active sentiments, nor even very often 



^128   

to any tsrpe of emotional state. For, as they fix the manner 
in which the different functions ought to concur in diverse 
combinations of circumstances which can arise, the objects 
to which they relate themselves are not always present to con- 
sciences. We do not always have to administer guardianship, 
trusteeship,'® or exercise the rights of creditor or buyer, etc., 
or even exercise them in such and such a condition. But the 
states of conscience are strong only in so far as they are per- 
manent. The violation of these rules reaches neither the 
common soul of society in its living parts, nor even, at least not 
generally, that of special groups, and, consequently, it can 
determine only a very moderate reaction. All that is neces- 
sary is that the functions concur in a regular manner. If 
this regularity is disrupted, it behooves us to re-establish it. 
Assuredly, that is not to say that the development of the division 
of labor cannot be affective of penal law. There are, as we 
already know, administrative and governmental functions in 
which certain relations are regulated by repressive law, because 
of the particular character which the organ of common con- 
science and everything that relates to it has. In still other 
cases, the links of solidarity which unite certain social func- 
tions can be such that from their break quite general reper- 
cussions result invoking a penal sanction. But, for the reason 
we have given, these counter-blows are exceptional. 

This law definitely plays a role in society analogous to that 
played by the nervous system in the organism. The latter 
has as its task, in effect, the regulation of the different functions 
of the body in such a way as to make them harmonize. It thus 
very naturally expresses the state of concentration at which 
the organism has arrived, in accordance with the division of 
physiological labor. Thus, on different levels of the animal 
scale, we can measure the degree of this concentration accord- 
ing to the development of the nervous system. Which is to 
say that we can equally measure the degree of concentration 

That is why the law which governs the relations of domestic functions is 
not penal, although these functions are very general. 



ORGANIC SOLIDARITY 


129 


at which a society has arrived in accordance with the division 
of social labor according to the development of co-operative 
law with restitutive sanctions. We can foresee the great 
! services that this criterion wUl render us. 

IV 

Since negative solidarity does not produce any integration 
by itself, and since, moreover, there is nothing specific about it, 
we shall recognize only two kinds of positive soUdar itv w hich 
are dis tinguishable by theTfoUowing qualities : ^ 

The first binds the individual directly to society with- 
out any intermediar y. In the second, he. .depends, upon so- 
ciety, because he depends upon the parts of which it is com- 
Roged. 

^2. ^ciety is not seen in the same aspect in the two cases.! 
m the first, what we call society is a more or less organized 
totality of beliefs and sentiments common to all the members 
of the group : this is the collective type . On the other hand, 
the society in which we are solidary in the recond instance is 
a system of different, special functions which definite relations 
unite. These two societies really make up only one. They 
are two aspects of one and the same reality, but none the less 
they must be distinguished. 

#^-3. From this second difference there arises another which 
helps us to characterize and name the two kinds of solidarity. 

The first can be strong only if the ideas and tendencies 
common to all the members of the society are greater in num- 
ber and intensity than those which pertain personally to each 
member. It is as much stronger as the excess is more con- 
siderable. But what makes our personality is how much of 
our own individual qualities we have, what distinguishes us 
from others. ]] This solidarity can gr ow only in inverre ra tio tP 
personality . There are in each of us, as we have said, two 
c(msciences : one ^ich fs common to our group in its entirety, 
\^ichj consequently, is not ourself, but society living and acting 
withmTusT; the other, on the contrary, represents that in us 



130 


  


which is personal and distinct, that which makes us an in- 
dividual.^*! Solidarity which comes from likenesses is at its 
maximum when the collective conscience completely envelops 
oiir whole conscience and coincides in all points with it. But, 
at , that moment, our individuality is nil. It can be born only 
if the community takes smaller toll of us. ^^There are, here, 
two contrary forces, one ^cent ripetal, the other centrifugal, 
which cannot flourish at the same time. We cannot, at one 
and the same time, develop ourselves in two opposite senses. 
If we have a lively desire to think and act for ourselves, we 
cannot be strongly inclined to think and act as others do. If 
our ideal is to present a singular and personal appearance, we 
do not want to resemble everybody else. Moreover, at the 
moment when this solidarity exercises its force, our personality 
vanishes, as our definition permits us to say, for we are no 
longer ourselves, but the collective life. 

The social molecules which can be coherent in this way can' 
act together only in the measure that they have no actions 
of^^eif own, as the molecules of inorganic bodies. That 
is why we propose to call this type of solidarity mechanic^ 
The term does not signify that it is produced by mechanic^ 
and artificial means. We call it that only by analogy to the 
cohesion which unites the elements of an inanimate body, as 
opposed to that which makes a unity out of the elements of a 
living body, /what justifies this term is that the link which 
thus unites the individual to society is wholly analogous to that 
which attaches a thing to a person. The individua l conscience, 
considered in this light, is a simple dependent upon the collec- 
tl^'lj^e and follows all of its movements, as the possessed 
object follows those of its owner. In societies wheffe this 
tj^e of solidarity is highly developed, the individual does not 
appear, as we shall see later. In divid u ali ty is something which 
the society possesses. /Thus, in these social t3rpes, personal 
ligESTare hot yet distinguished from real rights^ 

However, these two consciences are not in regions geographically distinct 
from us, but penetrate from all sides. 



ORGANIC SOLIDARITY 


131 


It is quite otherwise with the solidarity which the division 
of labor produces. ‘ Whereas the previous type implies that 
individuals resemble each other, this type presumes their 
difference. |The first is possible only in so far as the individual 
.personality is absorbed into the collective personality^; the 
second is possible only if each one has a sphere of action which 
is jpeculiar to him ; that is, a personality. ; It is necessary, 
then, that the collective conscience leave open a part of the 
individual conscience in order that special functions may be 
established there, functions which it cannot regulate. The 
more this region is extended, the stronger is the cohesion which 
.results from this solidarity. In effect, on the one hand, each 
one depends as much more strictly on society as labor is more 
divided ; and, on the other, the activity of each is as much 
more personal as it is more specialized. Doubtless, as circum- 
scribed as it is, it is never completely original. Even in the 
exercise of our occupation, we conform to usages, to practices 
which are common to our whole professional brotherhood. 
But, even in this instance, the yoke that we submit to is much 
less heavy than when society completely controls us, and it 
leaves much more place open for the free play of our initiative. 
Here, then, the individuality of all grows at the same time as 
that of its parts. Society becomes more capable of collective 
movement, at the same time that each of its elements has more 
freedom of movement. This solidarity resembles that which 
we observe among the higher animals. Each organ, in effect, 
has its special physiognomy, its autonomy. And, moreover, 
the unity of the organism is as great as the individuation of 
the parts is more marked. Because of this analogy, we pro- 
pose to call the solidarity which is due to the division of labor, 
organic. 

At the same time, this chapter and the preceding furnish us 
with the means to calculate the part which remains to each 
of these two social links in the total common result which they 
concur in producing through their different media. We know 
under what external forms these two types of solidarity are 



132 


  


symbolized, that is to say, what the body of juridical rules which 
corresponds to each of them is. Consequently, in order to 
recognize their respective importance in a given social type, it 
is enough to compare the respective extent of the two types of 
law which express them, since law always varies as the social 
relations which it governs.*® 


To make these ideas precise, we develop in the following table, the classi- 
fication of juridical rules which is found implicit in this chapter and the preced- 
ing: 

I. Rules with Organized Repressive Sanction 
(A classification of these rules will be found in chapter five) 


II. Rules with Restitutive Sanction Determining 


Negative or Ab- 
stentive Rela- 
tions 


Of the thing with 
• the person 


Of persons with 
persons 


Law of property in its various forms 
(movable, immovable, etc.) 

Various modalities of the law of 
property (servitudes, usufruct, etc.) 

Determined by the normal exercise 
of real rights 

Determined by the violation of real 
rights 


Positive Relations 
of Co-operation 


Between domestic functions 


Between diffuse 
economic func- 
tions 


Contractual relations in general 
Special contracts 


Of administrative 
functions 

Of governmental 
functions 


Between themselves 

With governmental functions 

With diffuse functions of society 

Between themselves 

With administrative functions 

With diffuse political functions 



CHAPTER FOUR 

FURTHER PROOF OF THE PRECEDING 


Because of the importance of the results of the preceding 
investigation, it will be well, before going further, to confirm 
them once more. This added verification is the more useful 
in that it will give us the opportunity for establishing a law 
which, while serving as proof, will also serve to clarify what 
is to follow. 

'^f the two types of solidarity which we have just distinguished 
really have the juridical expression that we have suggested, 
the preponderance of repressive law over co-operative law ought 
to be just as great as the collective type is more pronounced 
and as the division of labor is more rudimentary. Inversely, 
commensurate with the development of individual types and 
the specialization of tasks, the proportion between the two 
types of law ought to become reversed. ^ The reality of this 
relationship can be shown experimentally. ' 

I 

(The more primitive societies are, the more resemblances 
there are among the individuals who compose them.] ; Even 
Hippocrates in his work, De Acre et Locis, had said that the 
Scythians had an ethnic type, and not personal types. Hum- 
boldt remarks in his Neuspanien ^ that among barbarous 
peoples there is found a physiognomy peculiar to the horde 
rather than individual physiognomies. And the fact has 
been confirmed by a great many observers. ^‘Even as the 
Romans found among the ancient Germans very great resem- 
blances, so-called savages have the same effect upon a civilized 
> I. p. 116 . 


133 



134 


  


European. In truth, the lack of experience may often be the 
principal cause which determines such a judgment from a 
traveller ; . . . however, this inexperience could hardly produce 
this result if the differences to which civilized man is accus- 
tomed in his natal environment were not really more important 
than those that he meets with among primitive peoples. Well- 
known and often cited is the phrase of Ulloa that one who has 
seen an aboriginal American has seen all aboriginal Americans.” * 
On the other hand, among civilized peoples, two individuals are 
distinguishable from each other at a glance, and no preparation 
is needed for such an observation. 

Dj^^bon has been able to establish in objective fashion 
thisRom^eneity growing proportionally as one goes back to 
origins. He has compared the crania indigenous to different 
races and different societies, and has found “that the differences 
in cranial volume existing among individuals of the same race 
. . . are as great as the race is more elevated in the scale of 
civilization. After grouping the cranial volumes of each race 
in progressive series, being careful to establish comparisons 
only in series numerous enough for the terms to be reliable in 
gradual fashion, I have found that the difference in volume 
between the greatest male adult cranium and the smallest is 
roughly 200 cubic centimeters in the case of the gorilla, 280 in 
the case of the pariahs of India, 310 among the Australians, 350 
among the ancient Egyptians, 470 in the case of twelfth-century 
Parisians, 600 among modern Parisians, and 700 among the 
Germans.” * There are even some peoples where the dif- 
ferences are non-existent. “ The Andamans and the Todas 
are all alike. We can almost say the same for the Greenlanders. 
Five Patagonian crania that Broca has in his laboratory are 
identical.” * 

-^There is no doubt that the organic likenesses correspond to 
psychic likenesses. “It is certain,” says Waitz; “that this 
great physical resemblance of the natives derives essentially 

* Waits, Anthropologie der Naturvoelker, I, pp. 75-76. 

* Le9 SocUUsy p. 193. < Topinard, Anthropologie, p. 393. 



FURTHER PROOF OF THE PRECEDING 135 


from the absence of all strong psychic individuality, and from 
the state of inferiority of intellectual culture in general/ The 
homogeneity of characters (Geniuthseigenschaften) is incontest- 
able in the case of negroid peoples. In upper Egypt, the slave- 
trader appraises a slave according to his place~br birth and not 
according to his individual character, for long experience has 
taught him that the differences between individuals jof^the 
same tribe are insignificant beside those which are due to race. 
It is because of this that Nubas and Gallas are considered very 
faithful, northern Abyssinians treacherous and perfidious, 
the majority of others good domestic slaves, but not employ- 
able for manual labor; those of Fertit savage and prompt in 
wreaking vengeance.” ® Thus, originality is not simply very 
rare there, but it has no place. Everybody professes and 
practices, without demurring, the same religion ; schisms 
and dissents are unknown ; they would not be tolerated. “But, 
at this time, religion comprises all, extends to all.'^ It contains 
in a confused mass, besides beliefs properly religious, morality, 
law, the principles of political organization, and even science, 
or at least what passes for it. Religion even regulates details 
of private life. Consequently, to say that religious consciences 
are identical there — and this identity is absolute — is to imply 
that, save for the sensations pertaining to the organism and to 
the states of the organism, all individual consciences are com- 
posed of practically the same elements. Even sensible impres- 
sions themselves do not offer great diversity, because of the 
physical resemblances which individuals present. 

It is a very prevalent notion, however, that civilization has 
for its aim the growth of social similitudes. “As human asso- 
ciations extend,” says Tarde, “the diffusion of ideas following 
a regular geometric progression is more marked.” * According 
ta Hale,^ it is an error to attribute to primitive peoples a cer- 
tain uniformity of character, and he gives as proof the fact 

* Op. cit, I, p. 77. — Cf. ibid., p. 446. 

• Lois de Vimitaiion, p. 19. 

^ Ethnography and philology of the United States, p. 13, Philardelphia, 1846. 



136   

that the yellow and black races of the Pacific, who live side 
by side, are more sharply distinguished one from the other than 
two European peoples. Indeed, are not the differences which 
separate a Frenchman from an Englishman or a German less 
today than heretofore ?'^n almost all European societies, 
law, morality, customs, even fundamental political institu- 
tions are nearly identical. We can equally notice that in the 
midst of the same country we no longer find today the same 
contrasts that we used to find. Social life no longer varies, 
or no longer varies so much from one province to another. In 
unified countries such as France, it is nearly the same in all 
regions, and this levelling is at its maximum among the culti- 
vated classes.* 

But these facts do not weaken our position at all. Certainly 
different societies tend to resemble each other more, but that 
is not the same as saying that the individuals who compose 
them do so. There is now less distance than heretofore between 
the Frenchman and the Englishman, generally speaking, but 
that does not stop the contemporary Frenchmen from differing 
among themselves more than the Frenchmen of yesteryear. 
Indeed, it is even true that each province tends to lose its dis- 
tinctive feature, but that does not deny that each individual 
partakes more and more of what is personal to him. The 
Norman is less different from the Gascon, the Gascon from the 
Lorrainian and the Provengal; they no longer have little in 
common with the traits common to all Frenchmen, but the 
diversity which the last, taken as a unit, present, continues 
to grow. For, if some provincial types which used to exist 
tend to merge with others and disappear, there remains, in 
their place, a very considerable number of individual types. 
There are no longer as many differences as there are great 
regions, but there are almost as many as there are individuals. 
Inversely, where each province has its personality, it is not 

•That is what makes Tarde say: “The traveller who traverses several 
European countries observes more differences among the classes of people who 
have remained faithful to their old customs than among those of the higher 
classes.” Op. dt., p. 59. 



FURTHER PROOF OF THE PRECEDING 137 


the same in individuals. In relation to each other, they can 
be very heterogeneous, and yet be formed only of similar ele- 
ments. This is the spectacle presented by political societies. 
Indeed, in the biological world, the protozoans are so greatly 
distinct from each other that it is impossible to classify them in 
species ; ® and yet, each is composed of perfectly homogeneous 
matter. 

'.✓T'his opinion reposes, then, on a confusion of individual 
types and coUectiye types, as provincial or national. It is 
surely true that civilization tends to render the second nuga- 
tory, but we wrongly conclude that it has the same effect upon 
the first, and that the uniformity becomes general. Far from 
the two types varying with each other, we shall see that the 
effacement of one is the necessary condition for the appearance 
of the other.'® But there is never more than a restricted 
number of collective types in the midst of the same society, 
for it can comprise only a small number of races and regions 
different enough to produce such dissimilarities. On the other 
hand, individuals are susceptible to infinite diversification. 
The diversity is as great as the individual types are more 
highly developed. 

The preceding likewise applies to occupational types. There 
are reasons for believing that theyl ose th eir old distinction, 
that the chasm which used to separate occupations, and par- 
ticularly certain of them, is in process of being filled in. But 
what is certain is that in the interior of each occupation the 
differences are growing. Each individual is more and more 
ac^iring his own way of thinking and acting, and submits 
le ss com pletely to the common corporate opinion. Moreover, 
if, from occupation to occupation, the differences are less marked, 
they are*, in any case, more numerous, for occupational types 
have themselves been multiplied as labor has come to be more 
and^ more~drvided. If they no longer distinguish themselves 

• See Perrier, Tranaformisme, p. 235. 

“ See below, Book II, chs. ii and iii. — What we say there can segg e a |||^0 
same time to explain and confirm the facts that we are here estabprin&g. 



138 DIVISION OF LABOR SOCTOY 

from one another except through slight differences of emphasis, 
at least the emphases are more varied. The diversity is not, 
then, even from this point of view, less, although it may no 
longer manifest itself through violent and sharp contrasts. 

We can rest assured, then, that the more one goes back in 
history, the greater the homogeneity. On the other hand, 
the further one approaches to the highest social types, the 
greater the development of the division of labor. Let us now 
see how the two forms of law that we have distinguished vary 
in different steps of the social scale. 

II 

I 

-As far as we can judge of the state of law in very inferior 
societies, it appears to be entirely repressive. “ The savage .'’ , 
says Lubbock, “js in no partr.-.4cee- Throughout the entire 
world, the daily life of the savage is regulated by a number of 
customs (as imperious as laws), complicated and very im- 
portunate, of prohibitions and interdictions. Numerous severe 
rules, although not written, encompass all the acts of his life.” 
We know, of course, the extreme facility, among primitive 
peoples, with which ways of acting become transformed into 
traditional practices, and how great among them the force of 
tradition is. Ancestral customs are granted respect in such 
' degree that their derogation leads to punishment. 

But such observations necessarily lack precision, for nothing 
is as difficult to comprehend as these undulating customs. 
For our investigation to be conducted methodically, we must 
carry it, as far as possible, into the region of written laws. 

The fo ur last books of the Pentateuch, Exodus, Leviticus, 
NunX^, Devieronomy, represent the oldest monument of this 
kind that we have.*® In these four or five thousand verses, 

Lubbock, Lbb OrigineB de la civilisaJlion, p. 440. Cf. Spencer, PrindpleB of 
Sociology, p. 435. 

We do not have to give our opinion on the real antiquity of the work — it is 
sufficient that it refer to a society of very inferior type — nor on the relative 
antiquity of the parts which compose it, for, from our point of vi^w, they present 
the same character. We think of them as one. 



proof of the preceding 139 

there is a rel ativjel y smal l number wherein laws which can 
rigorously be called btKer\han repressive are set down. They 
relate to the following objects : 
Law of property: Law of redemption; Jubilee; — Property of the Levites 
{Leviticus, xxv, 14-25, 29-34, and xxvii, 1-34). 

Domestic law: Marriage {Deuteronomy, xxi, 11-14; xxiii, 5; xxv, 5-10; 
Leviticus, xxi, 7, 13, 14) ; Law of succession {Numbers, xxvii, 8-11 and 
xxvi, 8; Deuteronomy, xxi, 15-17); — Enslavement of natives and 
foreigners {Deuteronomy, xv, 12-17; Exodus, xxi, 2-11; Leviticus, xix, 
20; xxv, 39-44; xxxvi, 44-54). 

Loans and wages: {Deuteronomy, xv, 7-9; xxiii, 19-20; xxiv, 6 and 
10-13; xxv, 15). 

Quasi-delicts: {Exodus, xxi, 18-33 and 33-35; xxii, 6 and 10-17).^* 
Organization of public functions: Functions of priests {Numbers, x) ; of 
Levites {Numbers, iii and iv); of Elders {Deuteronomy, xxi, 19; xxii, 
15; xxv, 7; xxi, 1; Leviticus, iv, 15); of Judges {Exodus, xviii, 25; 
Deuteronomy, i, 15-17). 

Restitutive law — co-operative law in particular — holds a 
very minor position. Moreover, among the rules that we have 
just cited, many are not as foreign to penal law as appears at 
first glance, for they all bear the mark of religion. They all 
come, in the sanTe degree, from the divinity ; to violate them 
is to offend the divinity, and such offenses are sins which must 
be expiated. The Testament does not distinguish between 
commandments, but all of them consist of divine words which 
cannot be disobeyed with impunity. ‘4f thou wilt not observe 
to do all the words of this law that are written in this book, 
that thou mayest fear this glorious and fearful name. The 
Lord Thy God; Then the Lord will make thy plagues won- 
derful, and the plagues of thy seed, even great plagues, and 
of long continuance, and sore sicknesses, and of long con- 
tinuance.'^ The failure, even through error, to follow some 
precept, constitutes a sin and demands expiation.^® Some 
threats of this kind, about whose penal nature there can be 

IS All of the verses here brought together (less those referring to public func- 
tions) number 135. 

Deuteronomy, xxviii, 58-59. — Cf. Numbers, xv, 30-31. 

IS Leviticus, iv. 



140 


  


no doubt even directly sanction some of the rules that we 
have attributed to restitutive law. After deciding that a 
divorced woman could not be taken back by her husband, if, 
after remarriage, she obtained another divorce, the text adds : 
“For that is abomination before the Lord: and thou shall not 
cause the land to sin, which the Lord thy God giveth thee for 
an inheritance.” Moreover, there is the verse in which the 
manner that wages ought to be paid is regulated: “At his 
day thou shalt give him his hire, neither shall the sun go down 
upon it ; for he is poor, and setteth his heart upon it : lest he 
cry against thee unto the Lord, and it be sin unto thee.” The 
indemnities which quasi-delicts give rise to are equally pre- 
sented as veritable expiations. Thus we read in Leviticus: 
“And he that killeth any man shall surely be put to death. 
And he that killeth a beast shall make it good ; beast for beast 
. . . breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth.” 
Reparation for damage caused seems to be assimilated into 
punishment for murder and to be regarded as an application 
of the lex talionis. 

It is true that there is a certain number of precepts whose 
sanction is not specifically indicated ; but we already know that 
it is certainly a penal sanction. The nature of the expressions 
employed is sufficient proof of this. Moreover, tradition 
Reaches us that a corporal punishment was inflicted upon those 
who violated a negative precept, when the law did not formally 
stipulate such punishment.** In brief, in varying degree,_fljl 
Hebrew law, such as we find it in the Pentateuch, bears an 
essential^ repressive stamp. This is more marked in some 
spots, more latent Ifi others, but its presence is felt everywhere. 
Because all the prescriptions that it lays down are command- 
ments from God, placed, so to speak, under his direct suzerainty, 
they all owe to this origin an extraordinary prestige which 
renders them sacrosanct. Thus, when they are violated, 

Deuteronomy, xxiv, 4. ” Deuteronomy, xxv, 16. xxiv, 17, 18, 20. 

See Munck, Palestine, p. 216. — Selden, De Synedriis, pp. 889-903, enu- 
merates, following Maimonides, all the precepts which fall into this category. 



FURTHER PROOF OF THE PRECEDING 141 


public conscience does not content itself with a simple repara- 
tion, but demands expiation which avenges it. Since what 
gives penal law its peculiar character is the extraordinary 
authority of the rules which it sanctions, and since men have 
never known nor imagined any authority higher than that 
which the believer vests in God, law which is agreed to be the 
^rd of God himself cannot fail to be essentially repressive. 
We have even been able to say that all penal law is more or 
less religious, for its very soul is the sentiment of respect for a 
force superior to the individual man, for a power in some way 
transcendent, under some symbol which it makes penetrate 
into consciences, and this sentiment is also at the basis of all 
religiosity. That is why, in general fashion, repression domi- 
nates all law in lower societies. It is because religion completely 
pervades juridical life, as it does, indeed, all social life.^ 
Indeed, this character is still very marked in the laws of 
Manou. We have only to look at the high rank accorded 
criminal justice in the system of national institutions. “To 
help the King in his duties,” says Manou, “God made him 
the guiding genius of punishment, the protector of all living 
/beings, the administrator of justice, his very son, whose essence 
is wholly divine. It is the fear of punishment which makes 
all mobile and immobile creatures do their duty and accomplish 
their tasks . . . Punishment rules humanity; punishment 
protects humanity. Punishment works while the world 
sleeps; punishment is justice, say the wise men. . . . All 
classes would be tom asunder, all barriers would be broken, 
there would be only confusion in the universe if punishment 
no longer held its sway.” 

■^The law of the Twelve Tables refers to a society already 
much more advanced,**^ and much nearer to us, than was the 

Loi 8 de Manou, trans. Loiseleur, VII, v. 14-24. 

In speaking of one social type as being more advanced than another, we do 
not mean to suggest that the different social types are stages in one and the same 
ascending linear series, more or less elevated according to their historical places. 
It is, rather, certain that, if the genealogical table of social types could be com- 
pletely drawn up, it would resemble a tufted tree, with a single trunk, to be sure, 



142 


DIVISION* OF LABOR IN SOCIETY 


Hebrew. The proof of this is that Roman society arrived at 
the city-type only after passing through the stage of society 
at which the Jews remained fixed, and going beyond it. We 
shall have further proof of this later.“ Moreover, other facts 
serve as evidence for this short advance. First of all, we find 
in the law of the Twelve Tables all the principal germs of our 
actual law, whereas there is nothing common between Hebraic 
law and our law.*® ( Accordingly, the law of the Twelve Tables 
is absolutely laicj If in primitive Rome some legislators such 
as Numa were thought to have received their inspiration from 
heaven, and if, accordingly, law and religion were then in- 
timately linked, this alliance was certainly terminated at the 
'time when the Twelve Tables were drawn up, for this juridical 
pionument has been presented from its very inception as a 
wholly human work supervising only human relations. We 
find there some few dispositions concerning religious ceremonies, 
but they seem rather to partake of the quality of sumptuary 
laws. This more or less complete state of dissociation which 
we find between law and religion is one of the best signs by which 
we can recognize whether a society is more or less developed 
than another.*^ 

Thus, criminal law no longer occupies the whole field. The 
rules sanctioned by punishments and those which have only 
restitutive sanctions are now very distinct from each other. 
Restitutive law is separated from repressive law which for- 
merly absorbed it; it now has its own characteristics, its 
peculiar structure, its own individuality. It exists as a dis- 
tinct juridical species, with special organs, and a special pro- 
cedure. Co-operative law itself makes its appearance. We 

but with diverging branches. However, in spite of this tendency, the distance 
between two types is measurable ; they are higher or lower. Surely we have the 
right to say of a type that it is above another when it began with the form of the 
latter and yet has gone above it. Such is certainly the case with a more elevated 
branch or bough. 

** See Book I, ch. vi, 2. 

^ Contract4aw, the law of wills, guardianship, adoption, etc. are things 
unknown in the Pentateuch. 

** Cf. Walter, op. cit., §§ 1 and 2 ; Voigt, Die XII Tafeln, I, p. 43. 



FURTHER PROOF OF THE 'PRECEDING 143 

find in the Twelve Tables a domestic law and a contract- 
law. 

1 Penal law, however, while losing its primitive preponderance, 
stiir remains greaU lii“the 115 fragments of this law which 
Voigt &as collated, there are only 60 which can be called resti- 
tutive; 49 have a distinct penal accent.-® Consequently, 
penal law is not far from occupying half of the code that has 
come down to us. Moreover, what we have left can give us 
only a very incomplete idea of the importance which repressive 
law had at the time it was drawn up. F or there are parts which 
were devoted to this type of law which must have been the most 
easily lost. It is to the jurisconsults of the classical epoch 
that we owe, almost e.xclusively, the redemption of the frag- 
ments, but they were much more interested in the problems 
of civil law than in those of criminal law. The latter does not 
easily lend itself to the delicious controversies which have 
always occupied the attentions of jurists. This general in- 
difference towards it must have shrouded in darkness a good 
part of the ancient penal law of Rome. Moreover, even the 
authentic, complete text of the law of the Twelve Tables cer- 
tainly did not contain all of it. For it spoke neither of re- 
ligious crimes, nor domestic crimes, which were each judged 
by particular tribunals, nor of offenses against custom. We 
must take account, too, of the delay which penal law encounters 
in being codified. As it is engraven in all consciences, men do 
not see the need of writing it down in order to make it known. 
For all these reasons, we have the right to presume that, even 
in the fourth century in Rome, penal law still represented the 
greater part of juridical rules. 

This preponderance is still more certain and evident if we 
compare it, not to all restitutive law, but only to that part 
of this law which corresponds to organic solidarity. At this 
time, there is small evidence that domestic law is already very 
advanced. Procedure, being cumbersome, is neither varied 

** Ten (which are sumptuary laws) make no express mention of a sanction, 
but there is no doubting their penal character. 



144 


  


nor complex. Contract-law is only just being bom. “The 
small number of contracts which ancient law recognizes,” says 
Voigt, “contrasts in most striking fashion with the multitude 
of obligations which arise from the delict.” As for public 
law, besides still being very simple, it has, in large part, a penal 
character because it bears a religious stamp. 

Beginning with this epoch, repressive law loses its relative 
importance. On the one hand, even supposing that it has not 
regressed in a great number of instances, that many acts 
which in origin were regarded as criminal had not ceased to be 
punished — and the contrary is certain for what concerns 
religious delicts — at least it has not perceptively grown. 
We know that from the time of the Twelve Tables the principal 
criminological types of Roman law were settled. On the other 
hand, contract-law, procedure, public law, were further and 
further extended. As we advance, we see the infrequent and 
meager formulas that the law of the Twelve Tables comprised 
on these different points developing and multiplying until 
they became the voluminous systems of the classical epoch. 
Domestic law itself becomes complicated and diversified, as 
to primitive civil law there is added, little by little, praetorian 
law. 


The history of Christian society offers us another example 
of the same phenomenon. Maine had already conjectured 
thal^ in compa ring the different primitive laws, we would find 
the place of penal law to be_as great as the societies were an- 
cient.^^~ The facts confirm this assumption. 

“^The Salic law relates to a society less developed than was 
Rome in the fourth century. For although, as the latter, it had 
advanced beyond the social type at which the Hebrew people 
stopped, it was, however, less completely advanced. The traces 
are very much apparent, as we shall show later. Hence, penal 
law had a much greater importance there. In the 293 articles 
of which the text of the Salic law is composed, as Waitz has 

XII Tafeln, II, p. 448. ” Ancient Law, 



FURTHER PROOF OF THE PRECEDING 145 

edited it,** there are only 25 (about 9%) which do not have a 
repressive character. They are those which relate to the con- 
stitution of the Frankish family .‘■‘9 Contract has not yet been 
divorced from penal law, for the refusal to execute the con- 
tractual engagement on the fixed day is subject to a penalty. 
Still the Salic law contains only a part of the penal law of the 
Franks, since it concerns only the crimes or the delicts for which 
a settlement is permitted. But there were certainly some which 
could not be bought off. If we consider that the Lex contained 
not one word about crimes against the State, nor about military 
crimes, nor religious crimes, then the preponderance of repressive 
law will appear even more considerable.’® 

There is already less repressive law in the law of the Burgun- 
dians which is more recent. In 31 1 articles, we have counted 98, 
that is, nearly one-third, which have no penal character. But 
this growth takes place particularly in domestic law, which is 
complicated in its relation to the law of things as well as its 
relation to the law of persons. Contract-law is not much more 
developed here than in the Salic law. 

Finally, the law of the Visigoths, which is still more recent, 
and which concerns a still more cultivated people, evinces new 
progress in the same direction. Although penal law still pre- 
dominates here, restitutive law has almost equal importance. 
We find here, in fact, a complete code of procedure (Books I and 
II), a matrimonial and domestic law already highly developed 
(Book III, i and vi ; Book IV). Finally, for the first time, a 
whole book, the fifth, is devoted to business transactions. 

The absence of codification does not permit us to observe with 
the same precision this double development in all the course of 
our history, but it is incontestable that it followed the same 
direction. From this epoch, in fact, the juridical catalogue of 
crimes and delicts is already very complete. On the other hand, 
domestic law, contract-law, procedure, public law, are developed 

** Das Alte Recht der ScUischen Franken, Kiel, 1846. 

Tit. xliv, xlv, xlvi, lix, lx, Ixii.u 

Cf. Thonissen, Procedure de la loi saliquBy p. 244. 



146 


  


without interruption, and it is thus that the relation between the 
two parts of law that we have compared is finally found reversed. 

Repressive law and co-operative law vary, then, exactly as the 
theory, which finds itself thus confirmed, foresaw. It is true 
that this predominance of repressiv^law in lower societies has 
sometimes been attributed to some other cause. It has been 
explained “by the habitual violence in the societies which begin 
to write their laws. The legislator has divided his work in pro- 
portion to the frequency of certain accidents of barbarous life.” 
Maine, who gives this explanation, does not find it complete. 
In reality, it is not only incomplete ; it is false. First of all, it 
makes law an artificial creation of the legislator, since it would 
have been instituted to contradict public customs and react 
against them. But such a contention is today no longer tenable. 
La w expre sses customs, and if it acts against them, it is with_a 
force that it Jia,s borrowed from them. Where acts of violence 
are frequent, they are tolerated ; their delictuous character is in 
inverse proportion to their frequency. Thus, among lower 
peoples, crimes against persons are more ordinary than in 
civiUzed societies. Thus, they are in the last degree of the penal 
scale. We can almost say that the attacks are as severely 
punished as they are rare. Moreover, what makes the state of 
penal law plethoric is not that our crimes today are the object 
of more extended provisions, but there exists a luxuriant crimi- 
nality, peculiar to those societies, and which their pretended 
violence cannot account for: delicts against religious faith, 
against ritual, against ceremonial, against traditions of all sorts, 
etc. The real reason for this development of repressive rules is 
that at this moment ip the evolutionary scheme the collective- 
co nsci^ce is extensive, and strong, since labor has not vet been 
divided. 

These principles having been set up, the conclusion fof(hwp|i 
emerges from them. 


Ancient Law, 



CHAPTER FIVE 


PROGRESSIVE PREPONDERANCE OF ORGANIC 
SOLIDARITY; ITS CONSEQUENCES 

I 

It is enough to take a bird's-eye view of our Codes to see 
what a reduced place repressive law occupies in comparison with 
co-operati^Taiw. What is the former along side of the vast 
system formed by domestic law, contract-law, commercial law, 
etc.? The totality of relationships which come under penal 
regulation represent only the smallest fraction of general life; 
and, consequently, the ties which bind us to society and which 
come from the community of beliefs and sentiments are much 
less numerous than those which result from the division of labor. 

It is true, as we have already remarked, that the common con- 
science and the solidarity which it produces are not entirely ex- 
pressed by penal law. The former creates other ties than those 
whose break it punishes. There are some weaker and vaguer 
states of the collective conscience which make their action felt 
through the intermediary of custom, public opinion, without any 
legal sanction attaching to them, and which, moreover, con- 
tribute to the strength of social cohesion. But neither does 
co-operative law express all the links which the division of labor 
brings about, for it likewise gives us only a schematic repre- 
.^ntation from every part of life. In a multitude of cases, the 
relations of mutual dependence which unite the divided functions 
aye |^^b.ted only by usage, and these unwritten rules certainly 
in number those which are projections of repressive law, 
for they must be as diverse as the social functions themselves. 
The relation between them is, then, the same as that between 
the two types of law which they complement, and consequently, 

147 



148 


  


we can disregard them without modifying the calculated re- 
sult^ 

If, however, we were to state this relation only in our actual 
societies and at the precise moment of their history at which we 
have arrived, one might think that it was due to temporary or, 
perhaps, pathological causes. But ^e have just seen that the 
closer a social type approaches ours, the more dominant co- 
operative law becomes. On the other hand, penal law has a 
greater place the further removed it is from our present organi- 
zation. It is thus that this phenomenon is linked, not to some 
accidental and more or less morbid cause, but to the structure of 
our societies in their very essentials, since it develops further as 
the structure becomes more determined. Thus, the law that we 
established in our preceding chapter is doubly useful. Besides 
confirming the principles upon which our conclusion rests, it 
permits us to establish the generality of this conclusion, 
i But from this comparison alone we cannot yet deduce what 
part organic solidarity plays in the general cohesion of society. 
In effect, what makes the individual more or less strictly at- 
Whed to his group is not only the greater or lesser multiplicity 
^f the points of attachment, but also the variable intensity of the 
lorces which hold him attached there. Accordingly, the ties 
^which result from the division of labor, while being more nmner- 
0U8, would be weaker than the others, and the superior force of 
the latter would compensate, for their numerical inferiority. 



Mongols abandon their chief when they find his authority 
oppressive, and pass on to others. The Abipones leave their 



PROGRESS OF ORGANIC SOLIDARITY 149 


chief without asking his permission and without incurring his 
displeasure, and they migrate with their family wherever they 
please.^ In South Africa the Balondas migrate ceaselessly from 
one part of the country to the other. MacCulloch noticed the 
same phenomenon among the Koukis. Among the Germans 
every man who loved fighting could place himself under the 
military command of a chief of his own choosing. “Nothing 
was more ordinary and nothing seemed more legitimate. A 
man would arise in mid-assembly ; he would announce that he 
was going to make an expedition to some place, against some 
enemy. Those who had confidence in him and who desired 
booty acclaimed him as their chief and followed him. . . . The 
social tie was too weak to hold men back from the temptations 
of a life of wandering and gain.” * W aitz, i n speaking generally 
of lower societies, says that, even 'where a directive power is 
established, each individual retains enough independence so that 
he may, at any moment, separate from his chief, “and rise up 
against him, if he is powerful enough for that, without such an 
act being considered criminal.” * Even where the government 
is a despotism, says the same author, each man always has the 
liberty to secede with his family. Would not the rule according 
to which the Roman, made prisoner by the enemy, ceased to be 
part of the city, also be explained by the facility with which the 
social tie could be broken ? 

s, It is quite otherwise as labor becomes divided. The different ' 
^arts of the aggregate, because they fill different functions, can- 
not easily be separated. In the words of Spencer, if we' 
separated from Middlesex its surrounding district, all operations 
would cease in a few days, due to shortage of materials. Sepa- 
rate the district where cotton is manufactured from Liverpool 
and other centres, and industry ceases, since the population will 
perish. Separate the mining populations from the neighboring 
populations which found metal or make clothing by machinery, 

^ Prindplea of Sociology, III, p. 381. 

* Fustel de Coulanges, Histoire dee Institutions politigues de Vandenne Frunce, 
Part I, p. 352. 

’ AfUhropologie, etc., Part I, pp. 359-360. 



150 


  


and they would die socially, since they would die individually. 
Of course, when a civilized society undergoes a division such that 
one of its parts lives deprived of a central agency exercising its 
authority, it will not delay in setting up another, but it runs 
great risk of dissolution, and before reorganization reconstitutes 
a sufficient authority, it is exposed, for some time, to disorder 
and weakness.'* It is for this reason that violent annexations, 
otherwise so frequent, more and more become delicate opera- 
tions with uncertain success, ' ^day, t o detach a province from 
a countiQr js to detach one o r .several organs of , an organism. 
The life of the annexed region is profoundly troubled, separated 
as it is from the essential organs upon which it depends ; but 
such mutilations and such troubles necessarily determine dur- 
able grief whose memory is not effaceable. Even for an isolated 
individual, it is not an easy thing to change nationalities, in 
snite of the very great likeness between different civilizations.®, 
opposite fact would not be less manifest. The more feeble 
smidarity is, that is to say, the more the social tie is loosened, 
the easier it ought to be for foreign elements to become part of 
.societies. But, among lower peoples, naturalization is the most 
simple process in the world. Among the Indians of North 
America, every member of the clan has the right to introduce 
new members into it with a view to adopting them. Captives 
taken in war are either put to death or adopted into the clan. 
The women- and children-prisoners are usually the object of 
clemency. Adoption does not confer only the tribal rights 
(clan-rights), but even the nationality of the tribe.® We know 
how easily Rome, in its early days, accorded the right of citizen- 
ship to homeless and conquered peoples.^ It is particularly by 
such incorporations that primitive societies' grow. For them to 
be thus penetrable, there could not be a very strong sense of 

* Principles of Sociology, II, p.ls^ , i 

'We shall even see, in Chapter v II, ihat*the tie which binds the individual 
to his family is just as strong, more difficult to break, as domestic labor is more 
divided. 

' Morgan, Anrienl Society, p. 80. 

^ Dionysius of Halicarnassus, I, 9. — Cf. Accarias, Pricis de droit romain, I, 

( 61 . 



PROGRESS OF ORGANIC SOLIDARITY 161 


their own unity or their own personality.* The contrary phe- 
nomenon is observable where functions are specialized. The 
stranger, no doubt, can be provisionally introduced into the 
society, but the process by which he is assimilated and natural- 
ized is long and complex. It is no longer possible without assent 
from the group, solemnly made manifest and brought about 
under special conditions.*! 

It may appear astonishing that a tie which binds the individ- 
ual to the community by absorbing him into it can be broken 
or made with such facility. But what makes a social tie rigid is 
not what gives it resistive force. Because the parts of the aggre- 
gate, when united, only move together, it does not follow that 
they are obhged either to remain united or to perish. On the 
contrary, since they do not need each other, as each contains 
within himself all that social life consists of, he can go and carry 
it elsewhere. This can be done so much the more easily when 
the secessions are made by bands, for the individual is then 
constituted in such a way that he can only move with a band, 
even in order to separate himself from his group. On_hs part, 
society demands from each of its members, in so far as they are 
part of it, a uniformity of beliefs and practices. But as It* can 
lose a certain number of its members without the economy of 
its internal life being disturbed, because social work is very little 
divided, it does not strongly oppose these departures. Indeed, 
where solidarity derives solely from resemblances, whoever does 
not deviate too much from the collective type is, without op- 
position, incorporated into the aggregate. There are no reasons 
for opposing him, and, indeed, if there are places vacant, there 
is good reason for accepting him. But where society is made up 
of a system of differentiated parts which mutually complement 
each other, new elements cannot be grafted upon the old without 


* This fact is not at all irreconcilable with the fact that, in these societies, the 
stranger is an object of repulsion. He inspires such sentiments in so far as he 
remains a stranger. What we are saying is that he easily drops this stranger- 
quality in becoming naturalized. 

• We shall see, in Chapter VII, that the intrusions of strangers into familial 
society are as easily made as domestic work is less divided. 



152 


  


upsetting this equilibrium, without altering these relationships, 
tSH, accordingly, the organism resists intrusions which cannot 
produce any thing but disturbance . ) 

II 

I Not only, in a general way, does mechanical solidarity link 
men less strongly than organic solidarity, but also, as we advance 
‘in the scale bfsoclal evolution, it grows ever slacker. , 

/ The force of social links which have this origin ■irary with 
^respect to tfieTSfee" following' condittonsl 
^ 1. The relation between the volume of the common con- 
science and that of the individual conscience. The links are 
as strong as the first more completely envelops the second. 

'~12. The average intensity of the states of the collective con- 
science. The relation between volumes being equal, it has as 
Ihuch power over the individual as it has vitality. If, on the 
other hand, it consists of only feeble forces, it can but feebly 
influence the collective sense. It will the more easily be able to 
pursue its own course, and solidarity will be less strong. 

3. The greater or lesser determination of these same states. 
That is, the more defined beliefs and practices are, the less place 
they leave for individual divergencies. They are uniform moulds 
into which we all, in the same manner, couch our ideas and our 
actions. The consensus is then as perfect as possible ; all con- 
sciences vibrate in unison. Inversely, the more general and 
indeterminate the rules of conduct and thought are, the more 
individual reflection must intervene to apply them to particular 
cases. But it cannot awaken without upheavals occurring, for, 
as it varies from one man to another in quality and quantity, 
eversrthing that it produces has the same character. Centrif- 
ugal tendencies thus multiply at the expense of social cohesion 
and the harmony of its movements. 

On the other hand, s trong and d efined states of the coupon 
conscien.ce.J%re the roots of J)enff]^w7~ 5ut we are going to ^ 
that the number of tlmse is less today than heretofore, ^j^tEat, 
it diminishgs, progressively^ ae wraetiesappro^K buFsbe type^ 



PROGRESS OF ORGANIC SOLIDARITY 153 


It is thus that the average intensity and the mean degree of 
determination of collective states have themselves diminished. 
From this fact, it is true, we cannot conclude that the total 
extent of the common conscience has narrowed, for it may be 
that the region to which penal law corresponds has contracted, 
and that the remainder have dilated. It can have fewer strong 
and defined states, and retaliate with a very great number of 
others. But this growth, if it is real, is altogether equivalent to 
that which is produced in the individual conscience, for the 
latter has, at least, grown in the same proportions. If there are 
more things common to all, there are many more that are per- ' 
sonal to each. There is, indeed, every reason for believing that 
the latter have increased more than the former, for the differ- 
ences between men have become more pronounced in so far as 
they are more cultivated. We have just seen that special 
activities are more developed than the common conscience. It 
is, therefore, at least probable that, in each particular con- 
science, the personal sphere is much greater than the other. In 
any case, the relation between them has at most remained the 
same." Consequently, from this point of view, mechanical 
solidarity has gained nothing, even if it has not lost anything. 
If, on the other hand, we discover that the collective conscience 
has become more feeble and vaguer, we can rest assured that 
there has been an enfeeblement of this solidarity, since, in 
respect of the three conditions upon which its power of action 
rests, two, at least, are losing their intensity, while the third 
remains unchanged.] 

vTo prove this, it would avail us nothing to compare the numl 
ber of rules with repressive sanctions in different social types^ 
for the number of rules does not vary exactly with the senti- 
ments the rules represent. The same sentiment can, in effect, 
be offended in several different ways, and thus give rise to 
several rules without diversifying itself in so doing. Because 
there are now more ways of acquiring property, there are also 
more ways of stealing, but the sentiment of respect for the^ 
property of another has not multiplied itself proportionally^! 



154 


  


Because individual personality has developed and comprehends 
more aspects, there are more attacks possible against it, but the 
sentiment that they offend is always the same. It is necessary 
for us, then, not to number the rules, but to group them in 
classes and sub-classes, according as they relate to the same 
.sentiment or to different sentiments, or to different varieties of 
the same sentiment. We shall thus constitute criminological 
types and their essential varieties, whose number is necessarily 
equal to that of strong and defined states of the common con- 
science. The more numerous the la tter are, the more criminal 
types there ought to Be,^nd', consequently , the varia|;ions of the 
one should exactlyreilect the variations of the other, j To make 
these ideas precise, we have united in the following table the 
principal types and their varieties which have been found in 
different kinds of society. It is quite evident that such a clas- 
sification will be neither complete nor perfectly rigorous. For 
the conclusion that we wish to draw, however, it has a very 
sufficient exactitude. Surely it encompasses all the actual crim- 
inological types ; we risk omitting only some which have disap- 
peared. But as we wish to demonstrate capably the fact that 
their number has diminished, these omissions add fuel to our 
proposition. 


Rules Forbidding Acts Contrary to Collective Sentiments 

I 


Religious sentiments 


National sentiments 


Having General Objects 

[ Positive (imposing the practice of the religion) 


Negative 


Relative to beliefs about divinity 
Relative to worship 
Relative to the or- f Sanctuaries 
gans of worship \ Priests 
Positive (Positive civic obligations) 

Negative (Treason, civil war, etc.) 


‘®The sentimentB which we call positive are those which impose positive 
actions, as the practice of the faith. The negative sentiments demand only absti- 
nence. Between them there are only differences of degree. These differences, 
however, are important, for they mark out two moments in their development. 



PROGRESS OF ORGANIC SOLIDARITY 155 


Domestic sentiments 


Sentiments relative to 
sexual relations 


Sentiments relative to 
work 


Traditional diverse sen- 
timents 


{ Paternal and filial 
Conjugal 

Of kinship in general 
Negative The same 


{ Incest 
Sodomy 
Misalliances 

Prostitution 
Public decency 
Respect for minors 
Begging 
Vagabondage 
Intoxication 

Penal regulation of work 


Relative to certain occupational usages 

Relative to burial 

Relative to food 

Relative to dress 

Relative to ceremonial 

Relative to usages of all sorts 

Ldse-majest^ 


In so far as they 
are directly of- 
fended 


Plots against constituted 
authority 

Outrages, violence against 
authority 
Rebellion 


Sentiments relative to 
the organ of the com- 
mon conscience 


Indirectly “ 


Encroachment of private 
individuals on public 
functions 
— Usurpations — 

Public falsification 
Impersonation of function- 
< aries and diverse occu- 
pational misdeeds 
Frauds to the detriment of 
the State 

Disobedience of all sorts 
(administrative contra- 
ventions) 


It is probable that other ideas enter into reprobation of intoxication, no- 
tably the distaste which the state of degradation in which the intoxicated natu- 
rally finds himself inspires. 

** We put in this class the acts which owe their criminal character to the power 
of reaction proper to the organ of the common conscience, at least in part. An 
exact separation between these two subclasses is, however, very difficult to 
make. 



156 


  


II 


Having Individual Objects 


Sentiments relative to 
the person of the in- 
dividual 


Relative to the posses- 
sions of the individual 

Sentiments relative to the 
mass of individuals in 
respect of their per- 
sons or their goods 


Murder, assault — suicide 

{ Physical 

Moral (Pressure in the 
exercise of civil rights) 
Honor I Injuries calumnies 

I False witness 
Robbery — swindling, 
abuse of confidence 
Diverse frauds 

Counterfeiting — bankruptcy 
Arson 

Brigandage — pillage 
Public health 


III 

i 

1 It is enough to glance at this table to see that a large number 
of criminological types have progressively disappeared. 

Today, the regulation of domestic life has almost entirely lost 
all penal character. We must except only adultery and bigamy. 
Still, adultery occupies a very exceptional place in the list of 
crimes, since the husband has the right to excuse the condemned 
wife. As for the duties of the other members of the family, they 
no longer have any repressive sanction. It was not always thus. 
The decalogue makes filial piety a social obligation. Thus, 
assault upon a parent,** or speaking evil of a parent,** or dis- 
^besdng one’s father *® was punishable by death, f 
^ In the Athenian city-state, which, though similar in appear- 
ance to the Roman city-state, represents a more primitive type, 
legislation on this point was the same. Failure to perform fa- 
milial duties gave rise to a special complaint, the ypatft^ KOKtimaK. 
“Those who maltreated or insulted their parents or their su- 
periors, who did not furnish them with means of existence which 
they required, who did not see to it that they were given funerals 
in keeping with the dignity of their families . . . could be 

w Exodust nd, 17. — Cf. Deuteronomy ^ zxvii, 16. 

Exodus, xxi, 15. 
w Ibid,, aud. 18-21. 



PROGRESS OF ORGANIC SOLIDARITY 157 


prosecuted by the KaKtivtm” The duties of relatives 

towards an orphan were sanctioned by actions of the same kind. 
But the obviously smaller penalties which were meted out to 
these delicts show that the corresponding sentiments did not 
have the same force or the same determination in Athens that 
they had in Judea.^^ 

In Rome, a new regression even more defined is observed. 
The only famihal obligations that penal law consecrates are 
those which-link a client to his patron and conversely.^® As for 
other domestic misdeeds, they are no longer punished except by 
the father of the family acting as disciplinarian. To be sure, 
the authority which he had permitted him to deal with them 
severely, but when he employs his power thus, he is not a public 
functionary, a magistrate charged with enforcing respect for the 
general law of the State in his house ; but he is acting as a pri- 
vate citizen.^® These sorts of infraction tend to become purely 
private affairs in which society has no interest. So domestic^ 
functions, little by little, are taken from the central part of the 
common conscience.®® 

^ Like has been the evolution of sentiments relative to the 
relations of the sexes. In the Pentateuch, sins against custom 
occupy a considerable place. A multitude of acts are treated 
as crimes which our laws no longer countenance as such : 
defilement of the fiancee (^Deuteronomy, xxii, 23-27), union 

Thonissen, Droit p6nal de la Ripuhligue atMnienne, p. 288. 

The punishment was not determined, but seems to have consisted in deg- 
radation. (See Thonissen, op. cii., p. 291.) 

PatronuSf si clienti fraudem fecerit, sacer esto^ says the law of the Twelve 
Tables. — In the early life of the city, penal law was less foreign to domestic life. 

A lex regia, which tradition ascribes to Romulus, punished the child who had 
maltreated his parents (Festus, p. 230, see Plorare). 

»• See Voigt, XII Tafeln, II, p. 273. 

It may astonish some to hear talk of a regression of domestic sentiments 
among the Romans, the original home of the patriarchal family. We can only 
state the facts; what explains them is that the formation of the patriarchal 
family had taken from public life a host of elements, constituted as a sphere of 
private activity, a sort of interior conscience. A source of variations is thus 
opened which until then had not existed. From the day when familial life is 
taken from the jurisdiction of social action and put into the home, it varies from 
home to home, and domestic sentiments have lost their uniformity and their 
determination. 



158   

with a woman-slave {Leviticus, xix, 20-22), deception on the 
part of a deflowered girl who presents herself as a virgin at 
marriage {Deuteronomy, xxii, 13-21), sodomy {Leviticus, xviii, 
22), bestiality {Exodus, xxii, 19), prostitution {Leviticus, xix, 
29), and more specially prostitution of daughters of priests 
{iUd., xxi, 19), incest, of which Leviticus (ch. xvii) lists no less 
than seventeen cases. All these crimes, moreover, are punished 
very severely ; for the most part, by death. They are already 
less numerous in Athenian law, which no longer punishes any 
but paid pederasty, pandering, intercourse with a pure woman- 
citizen outside of marriage, finally, incest, although we are badly 
informed on the constitutive characteristics of the incestuous 
act. The punishments were generally less severe. In the 
Roman city, the situation is very much the same, although all 
this part of legislation is more undetermined. We might say 
that it has lost its importance. “Pederasty, in the primitive 
city,” says Rein, “without being provided for by law, was 
punished by the people, the censors, or by the head of the family 
with death, a penalty, or infamy.” The case was much the 
same with stuprum or illegitimate intercourse with a matron. 
The father had the right to punish his daughter; the people 
punished the same crime on complaint of the aediles by exacting 
a penalty or banishment.® It even seems that the repression 
of these delicts may be already, in part, a domestic and private 
affair. Today these sentiments no longer have any place in 
penal law except in two instances: when they are publicly 
offended, or the attack made upon the person of a minor, 
i^pable of self-defense.® 

( The class of penal rules that we have put under the heading 
diverse traditions represents, in reality, a multitude of distinct 
criminological types, corresponding to different collective senti- 
ments. But they have all, or nearly all, disappeared. In 
simple societies where tradition is all-powerful and where nearly 

Criminalrecht der Roemer, p. 865. 

*• /6u2., p. 869. 

» We put under this rubric neither rape, nor violation, where other elements 
enter in. They are acts of violence more than acts of indecency. 



PROGRESS OF ORGANIC SOLIDARITY 159 

everything is held in common, the most puerile usages become, 
by force of habit, imperative duties.^ At Tonkin, there are a 
host of failures to conform to conventions which are more 
severely punished than serious attacks on society.-^ | In China, 
the doctor^who has not correctly made out his prescription is 
punished.^“j The Pentateuch is filled with restrictions of the 
same kind. Without considering a very great number of semi- 
religious practices whose origin is evidently historical and all 
of whose force comes from tradition, food,^“ dress,” a thousand 
details of economic life are submitted to very extended regula- 
tion.^* Such was still the case up to a certain point in the 
Greek city-states. “The State,” says Fustel de Coulanges, 
“exercised its tyranny over the smallest things. At Locris, 
the law forbade men to drink pure wine. It was the usual thing 
for dress to be fixed invariably by the laws of each city-state. 
The laws of Sparta regulated the coiffure of women, and the 
Athenian laws forbade carrying more than three dresses on a 
journey, f In Rhodes, the law forbade shaving ; at Byzantium, 
the law punished anyone who even possessed a razor.'! In 
Sparta, on the contrary, it forced every man to shave his 
mustache.” But the number of these delicts is already 
smaller. In Rome, we find no ipore than a few sumptuary 
prescriptions relative to women, v In our time, we believe, it 
would be difficult to find any in our lawi ' \ 

\^But much the most important loss penal law suffered is that^ 
due^' ~ the total j^ pr almost total, disappea rance of religiQua. 
crimes -j .Thus, a world of sentiments ceased to count among the ' 
strong and defined states of the common conscience. No doubt, 
when we remain content to compare our legislation on this 
matter with that of inferior social types taken in bulk, this 

** Post, Bausteine, I, p. 226. 

Post, ibid. — The case was the same in ancient Egypt. (See Thonissen, 
Etudes sur Vhistoire du droit criminel des peuples anciens, I, p. 149.) 

Deuteronomy, xiv, 3 ff . 

Ibid., xxii, 5, 11, 12, and xiv, 1. 

“Thou shalt not sow thy vineyard with two kinds of seed” (ibid,, xxii, 
“Thou shalt not plow with an ox and an ass together “ (ibid., 10). 

*• Citi antique, p. 266. 



160   

regression appears so marked that we may doubt its normalcy 
and its durability. But when we closely follow the develop- 
ment of the facts, we see that this elimination has been regularly 
progressive. We see it become more and more complete as we 
advance from one social type to another, and it is consequently 
impossible for it to be due to some passing and fortuitous 
accident. 

We could not enumerate all the religious crimes which the 
Pentateuch marks out and represses. The Jew had to obey 
all the commandments of the Law on pain of suppression. ‘ ‘ But 
the soul that doeth aught with a high hand, whether he be home- 
bom or a sojourner, the same blasphemeth Jehovah ; and that 
soul shall be cut off from among his people.” Under this 
ruling, he was not only held not to do anything forbidden, 
but also to do everything ordered, such as having himself and 
his kin circumcised, of celebrating the sabbath, feast-days, etc. 
We do not need to recall how numerous these prescriptions are 
and with what terrible punishments they are sanctioned. 

In Athens, the place of religious criminality was still very 
great. There was a special writ, the ypa<f>rf ao-«^£ias, designed 
to deal with attacks against the national religion. Its sphere 
was certainly very extensive. “From all appearances, Attic 
law did not clearly define crimes and delicts which were qualified 
as itriptui, so that a large place was left to the discretion of the 
judge.” The list, however, was certainly shorter than in 
Hebrew law. Moreover, they are all, or nearly all, delicts of 
action, not of abstention. The principal ones that are cited 
are, in effect, the following : the denial of beliefs relating to the 
gods, to their existence, to their role in human affairs; the 
profanation of feast-days, of sacrifices, of games, of temples 
and altars ; the violation of the right of asylum, failure to show 
respect to the dead, the omission or alteration of ritual practices 
by the priest, initiating the vulgar into the mysteries, plucking 
the sacred olives, frequenting of temples by people who have 

w Numbers, xv, 30, 

Meier and Sohoemann, Der attUche Process, 2nd ed., p. 367. 



PROGRESS OF ORGANIC SOLIDARITY 161 


been forbidden to enter.®® The crime consisted, then, not in not 
celebrating the cult, but in disturbing it by positive acts or 
words.®® There is no proof that the introduction of new divin- 
ities needed to be regularly authorized and was treated as an 
impiety, although the natural elasticity of this accusation per- 
mitted such an interpretation of the case.®^ It is evident, more- 
over, that the religious conscience had to be less intolerant in 
the land of the sophists and of Socrates than in a theocratic 
society such as the Hebrew. In order for philosophy to be 
bom and develop there, it was necessary for traditional beliefs 
not to be so strong that they prevented its hatching. 

In Rome, there is even less prescription of individual con- 
sciences. Fustel de Coulanges has justly insisted upon the 
religious character of Roman society, but compared to earlier 
peoples, the Roman State was much less penetrated with 
religious feeling.®® Political functions, very early separated 
from religious functions, subordinated them. “Thanks to this 
preponderance of the political principle and to the political 
character of the Roman religion, the State did not lend its 
authority to religion except in so far as the attacks directed 
against it also menaced statehood indirectly. The religious 
beliefs of foreign States and of foreigners living in the Roman 
Empire were tolerated, if they were kept within bounds and 
did not tread upon the State’s authority.” ®® But the State 
intervened if its citizens turned towards strange divinities, and, 
by that, weakened the national religion. “However, this 
point was treated less as a question of law than as an interest 
of high administration, and action was taken against them 
according to the exigency of the circumstances, by edicts of 

** We reproduce the list of Meier and Schoemann, op. dt., p. 368. Cf. Tho- 
nissen, op. dt., ch. ii. 

^ Fustel de Coulanges says, it is true, that according to a text of Pollux (viii, 
46), the celebration of feast-days was obligatory. But the text cited speaks of 
a positive profanation, and not of abstention. 

** Meier and Schoemann, op. di.^ i^. 369. — Cf. DicHonnaire dea AntiquiUa, 
art. Asebeia. 

Fustel de Coulanges himself admits that this character was much more 
marked in the Athenian city-state (La CiU^ ch. xviii, last lines). 

•• Rein, op. dt.^ pp. 887~S88. 



162 


  


warning and prohibition or by punishments ranging up to 
death.” The religious processes certainly did not have as 
much importance in Roman criminal justice as they had in 
Athens. We do not find any juridical institution there which 
recalls the ypa^ij do’cjScui;. 

yNot only are crimes against religion more clearly determined 
and less numerous, but many of them have descended one or 
several degrees.^ The Romans did not put them all on the 
Bame level, but distinguished scelera expiabilia from scelera 
inexpiabilia. The first required only an expiation which 
consisted of a sacrifice offered to the gods.®* No doubt, this 
sacrifice was a punishment in the sense that the State could 
enforce its accomplishment, because the act which the guilty 
one had done contaminated society and might incur the wrath 
of the gods. But it is a punishment of an entirely different 
character from death, confiscation, exile, etc. Yet these faults, 
so easily redeemable, were the ones that Athenian law punished 
with the greatest severity. They were : 

1. Profanation of any locus sacer; 

2. Profanation of any locus religiosus; 

3. Divorce in case of marriage per confarreationem; 

4. The coming of a male issue from such a marriage ; 

5. Exposure of a dead person to the rays of the sun ; 

6. The accomplishment without bad intention of some one of the scelera 

inexpiabilia. 

^ In Athens, profanation of temples, any troubling of religious 
ceremonies, sometimes even the smallest infraction of ritual 
were punished with death. 

In Rome, there were real punishments only against attacks 
which were both very serious and intentional. The only 
scelera inexpiabilia were really the following : 

1. All intentional failure of duty on the part of functionaries to take 
care of the auspices or to accomplish the sacra, or, even more, their 
profanation ; 

Walter, op. cit., § 804. 

•• Marquardt, Roemische Staataverfaasung, 2nd ed., vol. Ill, p. 185. 

** For evidence of these facts, see Thonissen, op. dt., p. 187. 



PROGRESS OF ORGANIC SOLIDARITY 163 


2. The doing of a legis actio by a magistrate on a forbidden day, and 

that intentionally ; 

3. The intentional profanation of feriae by acts forbidden in such cases; 

4. Incest committed by a vestal or with a vestal.** 

Christianity has often been reproached for its intolerance. 
From this point of view, however, it realized considerable prog- 
ress over preceding religions. The religious conscience of Chris- 
tian societies, even at the time when the faith was at its height, 
called forth a penal reaction only when it was attacked by 
some infamous action, when one attacked it openly. Separated 
from temporal life much more completely than it was at Rome, 
it could no longer impose the same authority and had to hem 
itself in more with a defensive attitude. It no longer demanded 
repression of infractions of minor import as those we have just 
spoken of, but only those that menaced some one of its funda- 
mental principles, and the number of these was not great, for 
the faith, in becoming spiritual, more general and more abstract, 
became, at the same time, simplified. Sacrilege, of which 
blasphemy is only one variety, heresy under various forms, 
are hereafter considered the only religious crimes." The list 
continues to diminish, thus evincing that the strong and defined 
sentiments themselves became less numerous. How could it be 
otherwise? Everybody knows that the Christian religion is 
the most idealistic that has ever existed. Thus, it is made up 
of articles of faith which are very broad and very general, rather 
than of particular beliefs and determined practices. That is 
how it comes about that the dawn of free thought under Chris- 
tianity was relatively precocious^ Since its origin, different 

According to Voigt, XII Tafeln, I, pp. 450-455. — Cf . Marquardt, Roe- 
mische Alterthumer, VI, p. 248. — We put aside one or two scelera which had a 
lay character, as well as religious, and we count as such only those which are 
direct offenses against divine things. 

Du Boys, op, cit., VI, pp. 62 ff. Still it is necessary to notice that the se- 
verity with which religious crimes were treated is a late development. In the 
ninth centuryi sacrilege is still relievable by paying thirty livres (Du Boys, V, 
p. 231). An ordinance of 1226, for the first time, sanctioned the death-penalty 
for heretics. We can thus see that the enforcement of punishments against 
crimes is an abnormal phenomenon, due to exceptional circumstances, and that 
it did not partake of the normal development of Christianity. 



164 


  


schools have been founded, and even opposing sects. Hardly 
had Christian societies begun to organize themselves in the 
Middle Ages than scholasticism appeared, the first systematic 
effort of free thought, the first source of differences. The rights 
of discussion are from the first recognized. It is not necessary 
to show that its development since then has served to accentuate 
this. It thus comes about that religious criminality ended by 
completely departing, or almost completely departing, from 
penal law. 

i 

i Thus, there are a number of criminological tsrpes which have 
progressively disappeared without any compensation, for no 
new ones replaced those which disappeared. If we prohibit 
^IBegging, Athens punished idleness.^ There is no society where 
attacks against national sentiments or national institutions 
have ever been tolerated. Their repression seems to have been 
greater heretofore ; consequently, there is reason for believing 
that the corresponding sentiments have been weakened. The 
crime of Use-majest4, if heretofore widely applied, tends more 
and more to disappear. 

It has sometimes been said, however, that crimes against the 
individual person were not known among lower peoples, that 
robbery and murder were even respected there. Lombroso ' 
has recently tried to take up this thesis. He holds “that crime, ' 
with the savage, is not an exception, but the general rule . . ^ 
that it is not considered a crime by anybody.” ** But, in sup- 
port of this position, he cites only some rare, equivocal facts 
interpreted uncritically. Thus, he is forced to identify robbery 
with the practice of communism or with international brigand- 
age.*^ But, because property is common to all the members of 
the group, it does not at all follow that the law relating to 
robbery was recognized. Robbery can exis t only in so far as 

* Thonisaen, op. oil., p. 363. 

Vhomme criminel, l^nch trans., p. 36. 

^ **£yen among civiliied peoples,*' says Lombroso, in support of his thesis, 
"it took a long time to establish private property ** (p. 36). 



PROGRESS OF ORGANIC SOLIDARITY 165 


tl^re is p r oper ty.^^ Moreover, because one society does not 
find pillaging upon neighboring nations revolting, we cannot 
conclude that it tolerates the same practices in its internal 
relations and does not protect its nationals from one another. 
But it is internal brigandage with impunity that we must estab- 
lish. There is, it is true, a text of Diodorus and another of 
Aulus Gellius ** which would make one believe that such license 
existed in ancient Egypt. But these texts are contradicted 
by everything that we know of Egyptian civilization: “How 
can we admit,” Thonissen very justly says, “tolerance of rob- 
bery in a country where . . . the laws pronounced the sentence 
of death upon him who lived by illicit gain ; where the simple 
alteration of weight or size was punishable by the loss of both 
hands?” We can seek by means of conjectures*® to put 
together the facts that writers have inexactly reported to us, 
but the inexactitude of their recital is undoubted 

As for the homicides of which Lombroso speaks, they are 
always done under exceptional circumstances They are so 
many acts of war, so many religious sacrifices or the result of 
the absolute power that a barbarous despot exercises over his 
subjects, or a father over his children. But what must be 
shown is the absence of any rule which, in principle, proscribes 
murder. Among these particularly extraordinary examples 
there is not one which conduces to such a conclusion. The fact 
that under special conditions there is a departure from this 
rule does not prove that it does not exist. Do we not, indeed, 
meet with such exceptions even in contemporary societies? 
Is a general who sends a regiment to certain death in order to 
save the rest of the army acting otherwise than the priest who 

This must not be forgotten in judging certain ideas of primitive peoples 
concerning robbery. Where communism is recent, the link between the thing 
and the person is still weak ; that is to say, the right of an individual in a thing 
is not as strong as it is today, nor, accordingly, are the attacks against this right 
so serious. It is not that robbery is so much tolerated ; it does not exist where 
private property is non-existent. 

** Diodorus, I, 39 ; Aulus Gellius, Nodes Atlicae, XI, 18. 

Thonissen, tiudes, etc., I, 168. 

** The conjectures are very simple. (See Thonissen and Tarde, CriminaliU, 
p. 40.) 



166 


  


sacrifices a victim to appease the national god ? Are not people 
killed in war? Does not the husband who puts to death an 
adulterous wife enjoy, in certain cases, a relative impunity, if 
not an absolute? The sympathy with which murderers and 
robbers are sometimes treated is not more demonstrative. Indi- 
viduals can admire the courage of a man without, in principle, 
tolerating his act. 

. Besides, the conception which is at the base of this doctrine 
is contradictory in its terms. It supposes, in effect, that primi- 
tive peoples are devoid of all morality. But from the moment 
that men form a society, as rudimentary as it may be, there are 
of necessity rules which govern their relations, and, conse- 
quently, an ethic which, while it does not resemble ours, none 
the less exists. Moreover, if there is one rule common to all 
these moral precepts, it is certainly that which forbids attacks 
upon the person, for men who resemble each other cannot live 
together without each manifesting to his fellows a sympathy 
which opposes every act of a kind to make them suffer.^® 

What there is of truth in this theory is, first, tha^ the laws 
protective of the person sometimes overlook a part of the 
population, such as children and slaves. Second, it is legitimate 
to believe that this protection is now assured with, a more 
jealous care, and, consequently, that the collective sentiments 
which correspond to it have become stronger. But there is 
nothing in these facts which invalidates our conclusion. If all 
the individuals who make up society are today equally pro- 
tected, no matter what their status, this tempering of customs 
is due, not to the appearance of a really new {jenal rule,Jiut^to 
the extension of an old one. In the beginning, it was forbidden 
to make ah attempt upon the life of members of the group ; but 
this did not apply to children and slaves. Now that we no longer 

This proposition does not contradict that other, often enunciated in this 
work, that, at this moment of evolution, the individual personality does not 
exist. That which makes it imperfect is the psychic personality, and especially 
the superior psychic personality. But individuals always have a distinct or- 
ganic life, and this suffices to give birth to this sympathy, although it becomes 
stronger when personality is more developed. 



PROGRESS OF ORGANIC SOLIDARITY 167 


make this distinction, some acts which were not criminal have 
become punishable. But that is simply because there are more 
persons in society, and not because there are more collective sen- 
timents. It is not they which have multiplied, but the objects to 
which they relate themselves. If, however, there is place for ad- 
mitting that the respect of society for the individual has become 
stronger, it does not follow that the central region of the com- 
mon conscience is more extended. No new elements have 
entered, since this sentiment has always existed and has. always 
had enough energy not to tolerate its abrogation. The only 
change that has been produced is that an old element has 
become more intense. But this simple growth of strength 
cannot compensate for the multiple, serious losses that we have 
observed. 

^ Thus, viewed in the large, the common conscience consists 
less and less of strong, determined sentiments. Thus it comes 
about that thejiyerage intensity and mean degree of determi- 
nation of collective states are always diminishing, as we have 
stated.' Even the very restrained growth that we have just 
observed only serves to confirm this result. It is, indeed, re- 
markable that the only collective sentiments that have become'] 
more intense are those which have for their object, not social j 
affairs, but the individual.^ For this to be so, the individual-^" 
personality must have become a muclT fnore important element ; 
in the life of society, and in order for it to have acquired this ' 
importance, it is not enough for the personal conscience of each 
to have grown in absolute value, but also to have grown more 
than the common conscience. It must have been emanci- 
pated from the yoke of the latter, and, consequently, the latter 
must have fallen from its throne and lost the determinate power 
that it originally used to exercise. In short, if the relation 
between these two had remained the same, if both had developed 
in volume and vitality in the same proportions, the collective 
sentiments which relate to the individual would themselves 
also have remained the same. Above all, they would not be 
the only ones that had grown. For they depend uniquely on 



168 


  


the social value of the individual factor, and that, in its turn, 
is determined, not by the absolute development of this factor, 
but by the relative extent of the part which relates to it in the 
totality of social phenomena, 

V 

We could further verify this proposition by proceeding with a 
method that we shall only briefly indicate. 

We do not actually possess any scientific notion of what reli- 
gion is. To obtain this, we would have to treat the problem 
by the same comparative method that we have applied to the 
questi(m of crime, and that is an effort which has not yet been 
made. Cjt has often been said that religion was, at each moment 
of history, the totality of beliefs and sentiments of all sorts 
relative to the relations of man with a being or beings whose 
nature he regarded as superior to his own*^ But such a definition 
is manifestly ina dequat e. In effect, there is a multitude of 
rules, either of conduct or of thought, which are certainly re- 
ligious, and which, moreover, (jipply to relations of an entirely 
different sort.) Religion forbids the Jews eating certain meats 
and orders them to dress in a certain fixed way. It imposes 
such and such an opinion concerning the nature of man and 
things, concerning the origin of the world.d It often governs 
even juridical, moral, and economic relations) Its sphere of 
action extends, then, beyond the commerce of man with the 
divine. (jVe know for certain, moreover, that a religion without 
God exists, This alone should be sufficient to show that we 
no longer have the right to define religion in terms of the idea 
of God. Finally, if the extraordinary authority that the believer 
vests in the divinity can account for the particular prestige of 
everything religious, it remains to be explained how men have 
been led to attribute such an authority to a being who, in the 
opinion of the world, is in many cases, if not always, a product 
of their imagination. Nothing comes from nothing ; this force 

Buddhism (see article on Buddhism in the Encydopidie dea sciences reli» 
geuses). 



PROGRESS OF ORGANIC SOLIDARITY 169 


must have come to him from somewhere, and, consequently, 
this formula does not get to the heart of the matter. 

But this element aside, the sole characteristic that all ideas 
such as religious sentiments equally present seems to be that 
they are common to a certain number of people living together, 
and that, besides, they have an average intensity that is 
quite elevated. It is, indeed, a constant fact that, when a 
slightly strong conviction is held by the same community of 
men, it inevitably takes on a religious character. It inspires 
in consciences the same reverential respect as beliefs properly 
religious. It is, thus, very probable — this brief exposition, of 
course, is not rigorous proof — that religion corresponds to a 
region equally very central in the common conscience. It 
remains, it is true, to circumscribe this region, to distinguish 
it from that to which penal law corresponds, and with which, 
‘moreover, it is often either wholly or in part confused. These 
questions are left to study, but their solution does not directly 
affect the highly probable conjecture that we have just made. 

I But, if there is one truth that history teaches us beyond 
doubt, it is that religion tends to embrace a smaller and smaller 
portion of. social life. Originally, it pervades everything ; 
everything social is religious ; the two words are synonymous. 
/Then, little by little, political, economic, scientific functions 
[free themselves from the religious function, constitute them- 
selves apart and take on a more and more acknowledged tem- 
poral character. God, who was at first present in all human 
relations, progressively withdraws from them ; he abandons the ' 
world to men and their disputes. At least, if he continues to 
dominate it, it is from on high and at a distance, and the force 
which he exercises, becoming more general and more indeter- 
minate, leaves more place to the free play of human forces. 
The individual really feels himself less acted upon; he becomes 
more a source of spontaneous activity. In short, not only 
does not the domain of religion grow at the same time and in 
the same measure as temporal life, but it contracts more and 
more. This regression did not begin at some certain moment 



170 


  


of history, but we can follow its phases sinc ft tho origi ns of socia l 
evolution. It is'i thus, linked to the fundamental conditions of 
the development of societies, and it shows that there is a decreas- 
ing number of collective beliefs and sentiments which are both 
collective enough and strong enough to take on a religious 
character. That is to say, the average intensity of the common 
conscience progressively becomes enfeebled. 

This proof has an advantage over the preceding ; it permits 
us to establish that the same law of regression applies to the 
representative element of the common conscience quite as 
completely as to the affective element. Through penal law, 
we can reach only phenomena of sensibility, whereas religion 
comprehends, besides sentiments, ideas and doctrines. 

' The decrease in the number of proverbs, adages, dicta, etc. 
as societies develop, is another proof that the collective repre- 
sentations move towards indetermination. 

Among primitive peoples, formulas of this type are very 
numerous. The greater part of the races of west Afric a, as 
Ellis says, possess an abundant collection of proverb's; there 
is at least one for each circumstance of life, a fact which is 
common to the majority of peoples who have made little progress 
in civilization.®' Advanced societies are somewhat fertile in 
this regard only during the early years of their existence. Later, 
not only do they not produce any new proverbs, but the old ones 
die out little by little, lose their proper acceptation and end 
even by no longer being communicated. The proof of this is 
that it is particularly in lower societies that they find their most 
fertile field, and that today they are found maintained only in 
the least elevated classes.®* prove rb is » conde nsed 

statement ttf. g coll ectiv e idea, or sentiment “ielatiye, to a. deter- 
mined category of objects. It is, indeed, impossible that there 
be some beliefs and sentiments of this character without their 
being fixed in this form. As every thought tends towards an 

" The Ewe-Speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast, p. 268, London, 1890. 

** Wilhelm Borphft^t, Die Sprichwdrtlichen Redensarten, XII, Leipzig, 1888. 

Of. V. Wsrsz, LfisJ^prichwdrt^ hex den Roemischen Komikem, Zurich, 1889. 



PROGRESS OF ORGANIC SOLIDARITY 171 


expression adequate to it, if it is common to a certain numbeir of 
individuals, it necessarily ends by being enclosed in a formula 
which is equally common to them. Every function which 
endures makes an organ in its own image. It is thus wrong to 
explain the declin^of proverbs by speaking of our realistic taste 
and duFscIiMitTfic temper. We do not carry over into conver- 
sational language such a care for precision nor such a disdain 
for images. On the contrary, we find a great deal of relish in 
the old proverbs which have come down to us. Moreover, the 
image is not an inherent element in the proverb ; it is one of the 
means, but not the only one, by which collective thought con- 
denses itself. These short formulas end, however, by becoming 
much too narrow to encompass the diversity of individual 
sentiments. Their’ unity no longer has any relation to the 
divergences which are existent. Thus, they manage to maintain 
themselves only by assuming a very general signification, and 
ultimately disappear. The organ atrophies because the func- 
tion is no longer exercised ; that is to say, because there are 
fewer quite defined collective representations to enclose in a 
determined form. 

Thus, everything tends to prove that the evolution of the 
common conscience takes place in the manner we have indicated.i 
(Truly, it progresses less than individual consciences. In any!' 
case, it becomes feebler and vaguer in its entirety. The col - 1 
lective type loses its background, its forms become more abstract 
and more indecisive. No doubt, if this decadence were, as has 
often been believed, an original product of our most recent 
civilization and a unique happening in the history of societies, 
we might ask if it will endure. But, in reality, it has pursued 
this course in an uninterrupted manner since the most distant 
times. That is what we are showing. Individualism, free 
thought, dates neither from our time, nor from 1789, nor from 
the Reformation, nor from scholasticism, nor from the decline 
of Graeco-Latin poljrtheism or oriental theocracies. It is a 
phenomenon which begins in no certain part, but which devel- 
ops without cessation all through history. Assuredly, this 



172 


  


development is not straightforward. New societies which 
replace old social types never begin their careers where their 
predecessors left off. How could that be possible? What 
the child continues is not the old age or mature age of its parents, 
but their own infancy. If, then, we wish to reckon the course that 
has been run, we must consider successive societies at the same 
epoch of their life. We must compare Christian societies of 
the Middle Ages with primitive Rome, the latter with the 
original Greek city-state, etc. We find, then, that this prog- 
ress, or, if one wishes, this regression, is accomplished, so 
to speak, without a break in continuity. This is an inevitable 
law against which it would be absurd to inveigh. 

This is not to say, however, that the common conscience is 
threatened with total disappearance. Only, it more and more 
comes to consist of very. general and very indeterminate ways 
of thinking and feeling, which leave an open place for a growing* 
multitude of individual differences. Th ere is even a place whe re 
it is strengthened and made precise : that is the way in which 
it regards the individualTTAs all the other beliefs and ^11 the 
other practices take on a charac ter less and less reli gious, the 
i ndividual becomes the object of a sort of religi on. We erect 
a cult in behalf of personal dignity which), as every strong c ult, 
alre ady has it's superstit ions. It is thus, if one wishes, a com- 
mon cult, but it is possible only by the ruin of all others, and, 
consequently, cannot produce the same effects as this multitude 
of extinguished beliefs. There is no compensation for that. 
Moreover, if it is common in so far as the community partakes 
of it, it is individual in its object. If it turns all wills towards 
the same end, this end is not social. It thus occupies a com- 
pletely exceptional place in the collective conscience. It is 
still from society that it takes all its force, but it is not to 
society that it attaches us ; it is to ourselves. Hence, it does 
not constitute a true social link. That is why we have been 
justly able to reproach the theorists who have made this 
sentiment exclusively basic in their moral doctrine,, with the 
ensuing dissolution of society. We can then conclude by saying 





PROGRESS OF ORGANIC SOLIDARITY 173 


that all social links which result from likeness progressively 
slacken. 

This law, in itself, is already enough to show the tremendous 
grandeur of the role of the division of labor. In sum, since 
mechanical solidarity progressively becomes enfeebled, life 
properly social must decrease or another solidarity must slowly 
come in to take the place of that which has gone. The choice 
must be made. In vain shall we contend that the collective 
conscience extends and grows stronger at the same time as 
that of individuals. We have just proved that the two terms 
vary in a sense inverse to each other. Social progress, however, 
does not consist in a continual dissolution. On the contrary, 
the more we advance, the more profoundly do societies reveal 
the sentiment of self and of unity. There must, then, be some 
other social link which produces this"“result ; this cannot be 
* any other than that wliicli comes from the division of labor. 

If, moreover, one recalls that even where it is most resistant, 
mechanical solidarity does not link men with the same force 
as the division of labor, and that, moreover, it leaves outside 
its scope the major part of phenomena actually social, it will be- 
come still more evident that social solidarity tends to become 
exclusively organic. It is the division of labor which, more and 
more, fills the role that was formerly filled by the common 
conscience. It is the principal bond of social aggregates of 
^ihigher types. 

This is a function of the division of labor a good deal more 
important than that ordinarily assigned to it by economists. 



CHAPTER SIX 


PROGRESSIVE PREPONDERANCE OF ORGANIC 
SOLIDARITY; ITS CONSEQUENCES {Continued) 

I 

Thus, U is an historical law that mechanical solidarity which 
first stands alone, or nearly so, progressively loses ground, 
a nd that o rgani.c.solidarity becomes, little by little, preponder- 
^t. But when the way in which men are solidary becomes 
modified, the structure of societies cannot but change. The 
form of a body is necessarily transformed when the molecular 
afiShities are no longer the same. Consequently, if the preceding 
proposition is correct, there ought to be two social types which 
correspond to these two types of solidarity. * 

If we try to construct intellectually the ideal type of a society 
whose coKesion was exclusively the result of resemblances, 
we should have to conceive it as an absolutely homogeneous 
naass" whose parts were not distinguished from one another. 
Cd fisequMtly,' the y w ould have no arrangement; in short, it 
would be devoid oL -all definite form and ah orgamzat ioh.' It 
would be the veritable sociaTprotoplasm, the geraT whence 
would arise all social types. We propose to call the aggregate 

thus characterized , hwd e. 

~ Itls true that we have not yet, in any completely authentic 
fashion, observed societies which, in all respects, complied with 
this definition. What gives us the* right to postulate their 
existence, however, is that lower societies, those which are most 
closely akin to primitivity, are formed by a simple repetition of 
i^^gregates of this kind. We find an almost perfectly pure 
example of this social oiganization among the Indians of North 


