In Second Treatise of Government and Leviathan, John Locke and Thomas Hobbes, respectively, imagine the progression of human society out of a state of nature.  For both of these writers, the state of nature is the original condition that people live in, prior to their cohesion into structured societies, in which they are ruled by their natural inclinations.  The writers agree that people consider themselves to be equal in the state of nature; however, they disagree about the  boundaries of behavior in the state of nature, and these differences form the foundation for the different views that the writers take on political structure and social relationships.  The fundamental discrepancy between Locke’s and Hobbes’ views on the individual—and their consequential suppositions about the structure of government—reduces to the writers’ differing concepts of urgency in the state of nature.  Both human nature and the pressures which encourage stable social and political structures greatly impact the ways in which Locke and Hobbes envision government, and the structures that they choose to support or reject within their evaluations.
	Hobbes and Locke both begin their examinations of human society from an original state of nature.  Within the state of nature, all people are essentially equal; while Hobbes makes note that some individuals have greater abilities in certain areas, he states that such inequalities are inconsequential in larger context, and both writers posit that no person can claim to have a greater entitlement to power and benefits than any other person (Hobbes 183, Locke 8).  This equality, however, has different effects for Hobbes and Locke.  According to Locke, since all people have the same physical and mental facilities, they also have the same rights to life, health, liberty, and property.  Since all people can see that they are the equals of those around them, they recognize the rights of others to these entities (9).  Locke indicates that it is simply not in character for humans to try to take what that which does not belong to them by right, and that this type of action defies any kind of reason.  The recognition that equality means that no one has power greater than that of anyone else reasonably leads to non-violent interactions between people, as it would go against reason—and thus the law of nature—to not preserve mankind (Locke 9).
	For Locke, reasoning is a faculty shared by all individuals; it is the driving force behind action, and anyone who defies reason to hurt another person is justifiably punished for the transgression.  Hobbes, however, sees reason differently.  To him, it is less an inherent law of nature and more a summing up of the consequences of various actions (111).  It governs behavior by determining what the action with the best result for the individual would be, not by laying the groundwork for a system of inherent rules; and it is manipulated by what Hobbes considers to be the real motivator of individuals: desire (95).  Hobbes claims that desire gives people the incentive to begin thinking about how to obtain whatever they seek, and then to plot out how to reach this penultimate goal.  The train of thought is extended until it reaches the idea for an action that can be taken in the immediate future (96).  For Hobbes, though, the human ruled by desire is inconsiderate of anyone else.  He argues that because humans have equal abilities, they also have equal facilities to hope for and plan their way toward acquiring whatever they desire.  When two people desire the same thing which they cannot both obtain, then, they become enemies and seek to destroy one another in order to preserve their own means of acquiring the object of their desires (184).
	These opposing concepts of human motivation and their consequential implications for behavior deeply color Hobbes’ and Locke’s images of interaction between people in the state of nature.  Hobbes concludes from his assumptions about people that, since there is no lack of items which multiple people may desire, interaction on the state of nature can only involve the potential for violence, and therefore the state of nature is actually a state of war, in which each individual is opposed to every other individual (185).  He argues that peace is only achieved when people are either too afraid of death to continue in their state of war or they recognize that the only way to obtain something that they desire is through a peaceful contract (188).  Hobbes, then, supposes that people only interact peaceably when they have the opportunity to gain some sort of power through this contact.  Locke, in stark contrast, states that people in the state of nature are inclined not to harm one another in their endeavors.  In fact, he postulates that people are unable to supply all of their own needs in the state of nature, and thus must become social in order to survive.  Locke claims that, because of this necessity, people do not need to make any official contract with one another in order to socialize peaceably (13).  As a result of this assessment of the state of nature, Locke asserts that there is a clear distinction between the state of nature and the state of war; and it is only in the state of war that people attempt to assert absolute power over one another, taking away the liberty that each person has a right to in the state of nature (15).
	Both Hobbes and Locke aver that it is against human nature to remain in a state of war for long, as this state makes it more difficult to protect their lives and property.  As a result, both writers claim that there needs to be a way in which the individual may extract him- or herself from this state, which manifests itself in an organized political structure.  As they both state, large communities demand a common authority, either to assert a force adequate to mold human behavior (Hobbes 196) or to provide relief and judgment in response to transgressions of peaceful relations (Locke 16).  Each writer supplies the concept of a contract between individuals to establish such a social structure, but the motivations of the individuals for each of them inform the nature of government.  To Hobbes, government is formed of a collection of covenants between individuals in which each person grants the right to rule his or her own self to a single sovereign in exchange for each other person in the community doing the same (227).  This mutual formalized trust in another person to determine the fates of each individual takes away the right of any person to take actions that might defy the will of the sovereign, and, as a result, manmade law is invented.  Hobbes’ concept of the covenant, though, revolves around the argument that without a covenant, people are prone to harm one another; because this sense of urgency is absent in Locke’s claims about the temperament of humans and the state of nature, his depiction of societal formation is far less pressing.  He describes political structure as a convenient way to ensure that there is an objective judge to condemn transgressions against rights to life and property (16).  However, he also claims that this convenience comes at a price: freedom is restricted to the boundaries of the law (33).  While Hobbes concludes that any social contract is preferable to the state of nature—even one in which liberty is greatly stifled—Locke expresses the view that there is something desirable in the state of nature because individuals operate on reason and morality.
The writers’ assessments of the social contracts that facilitate political organization lead them to vastly different ends regarding the best structure for government.  Hobbes asserts that, due to the selfish goals of human desire and reason, covenants made without some sort of compelling force are necessarily invalid (196).  The assurance of security amongst individuals who have entered into the contract to abide by the law of the sovereign is gotten through the amount of power that this group holds over those who have not entered the contract (224).  Thus, even the establishment of peace is, for Hobbes, a process that relies heavily on the ability of one group to overpower another.  The threat of two different divisions of the government—whether this be separate branches of government or even separate individuals within an assembly—attempting to overthrow one another does not allow the political structure to serve its purpose of ensuring the obedience of the subjects.  It instead would lead more often to the severing of the fundamental contract holding society together in a peaceful manner, and humanity would return to the state of war that it started out in.  Hobbes proposes that for this reason, all of the power should be given to one individual, who cannot contradict him- or herself and who cannot oppose him- or herself for more power.
Locke, though, specifically warns against the establishment of an absolute monarchy.  Since the primary role of government for Locke is the establishment of an impartial judge who can settle disputes between individuals, it is particularly undesirable to formulate a political structure in which one person is immune to judgment because there is no other judge available (48).  Where Hobbes sees the absolute power of the monarch as helpful in its single, expedient source from which law is generated, Locke asserts that the irrefutable nature of such laws leaves the sovereign in the state of nature, and thus the entire community cannot possibly reside in a society (50).  Absolute power for the government, then, does not provide the conveniences for which individuals decided to leave the state of nature, and in fact leaves them with fewer liberties than the state of nature provides.  It goes against reason to leave the state of nature in this case.  Locke argues instead that assemblies provide a more beneficial form of government, as they do not place individuals above the law (73).  As subjects of the laws that are upheld by the assembly, the representative members cannot establish laws that benefit only themselves, and thus are apt to produce laws which protect the property and lives of all people.
For both Hobbes and Locke, the desirability of different forms of government depends in large part on the state of nature.  This holds a direct connection with the inherent characteristics of humans.  Both writers depict political structures as results of social contracts; and, for each of them, these social contracts are characterized by their urgency or necessity.  In his Leviathan, Hobbes illustrates a state of nature that is violent and pits all people against one another; thus, because human nature and reason call for peace to facilitate survival, it is absolutely necessary for individuals to enter into contracts with each other and mutually cede the power to harm one another to a trusted sovereign.  In contrast, Locke, who depicts humans as moral and reasonable in nature, delineates in his Second Treatise of Government an environment in which social interaction is important for providing individuals with their needs, and is consequently peaceful in nature.  The social contract is, for Locke, the means for acquiring impartial judgment, which is achieved through a rule by the majority—an essential part of social relations, to be certain, but not a dire need.  For both Locke and Hobbes, then, social and political relations are informed not only by the inherent character of humans, but also by the urgency of the social contract for peace.

Rousseau uses the term “amour propre" to indicate a kind of self-love that is integral to civilized society.  He claims that people in a civilized society have “amour propre interested,” meaning that they begin to engage in this self-love, particularly as it is involved in their social interactions.
	Rousseau’s version of social progression through history assumes that humans are not inherently social creatures.  He claims that humans are, in fact, very solitary, fulfilling their own survival needs on a daily basis and only interacting at chance encounters, usually for procreation.  It was only on rare occasions that people interacted out of need, and at such times they only assisted one another because of their natural capacity for pity.  Since the only needs that were apparent in Rousseau’s state of nature were those of food, sleep, and procreation, amour propre was irrelevant to daily life and thus largely ignored, although the desire for well-being did give some guidance in the individual’s regular behavior.  Rousseau argues that people slowly began to take advantage of their environment, which allowed for technological progress until they were eventually able to use natural materials to build huts for themselves (164).  A new sedentary lifestyle allowed for the formation of families, but also revolutionized life for humans by introducing the concept of property, the natural result of using labour to create an item.  It further allowed for greater amounts of leisure time which were used for innovation.  Humans became less physically active as they gained more tools to help with their work.  At the same time, greater numbers of people became sedentary, forcing social bonds to form because of the permanent nearness of others.  Rousseau imagines that these closer bonds caused people to spend more time together, gathering, for example, to sing and dance; these interactions provided the opportunity for people to examine one another and distinguish between individuals, leading to comparisons in their abilities and attractiveness (166).  People, as a result, wanted to be looked at in admiration, and thus it became important both for each individual to be good at something and for others to respect the individual for this talent; any contempt would be regarded as a personal injury.  This need for social esteem and respect for the talents that an individual believed him- or herself to possess comprised amour propre, and thus only came about once civilization was established.
(2)	When Rousseau says that “to be and to appear became two entirely different things,” he means that, within civilization, there is a distinction between an individual having a talent and an individual advertising that he or she has a talent.  Rousseau argues that within civilization, natural inequalities are magnified by the cultivation of skills, particularly in agriculture and metallurgy (170).  Because of unequal demand for metal or agricultural products, either the smith or the farmer became a greater beneficiary of income in the economic exchange.  People with greater strength were able to put in more labor and those who were more skilled or inventive were able to perform their work with greater efficiency, further improving their economic situations by increasing the amount of wealth that these individuals could accrue.  Thus, natural variations in intelligence, talent, and physical build exacerbated the disparities between people in civilization, placing those with slight natural advantages in a position superior to anyone else.  They accordingly gained the social renown that all civilized humans craved, according to Rousseau.  It became entirely necessary to possess such qualities; and, should an individual not be able to prove that he or she had them, recognition was unlikely.  An untalented person then needed to pretend to have qualities that deserved renown in order to gain an advantage in the social standings, and, as a result, those who believed their qualities to be greater than those of others needed to prove this belief with greater effectiveness.  It became more important to appear to have certain qualities than it was to actually possess them in order to improve one’s social rank, thus making appearance and being entirely separate.  Within Rousseau’s view, this distinction can only arise out of civilized society, because civilization is the only construction of the world in which survival depends on recognition by other people.  The disparity between appearing and being shows, in fact, a clear distinction between Rousseau’s state of nature and his model of the civilized world.
(3)	According to Rousseau, long-term human association does not occur until people are permanently settled near one another.  In order for this to happen, people need to build their own dwellings, which, because of the labour that they put into building them, they are willing to protect.  Civilization, then, cannot exist without some concept of property ownership in Rousseau’s view of the world.  He further argues that social interaction within civilization forces people to draw comparisons between those around them, finding those who have the greatest skill, talent, or physical qualities.  Such endowed humans have the greatest opportunity to exchange the food or metal products that they create, increasing their economic prosperity as well as their social standings.  Rousseau’s civilization, then, centers on a social system that is closely related to property ownership.  The individual’s reliance on societal recognition in order to gain advantage over others and to survive in the civil society forces him or her to satisfy “new needs”—those which make the person visible within the society—which Rousseau finds much more constricting than those needs that exist in the state of nature.  Physical survival needs are confused with the desire to increase social standing, as this also becomes a necessity for life.  As the social hierarchy is increasingly determined not by skill but by the illusion of having skill, which is demonstrated through the collection of property, it becomes more important to put down others who may have greater wealth or more skills and may challenge the individual’s social standing.  Rousseau argues that without the recognition of property—or, at least, without an unequal distribution of property—natural inequalities in skill would not have caused social inequality; but this, of course, was not the case of history.
(4)	Rousseau argues that the necessity of a better social standing forces humans to depend on one another.  The upper class people need the respect and services of the lower class to maintain their stature, while the lower class people need the economic support of the upper class to fulfill their daily needs and the recognition of their skills by the upper class in order to improve their own social rank.  In order to obtain the necessities of civilized life, individuals need to coerce those around them into caring about their situations, among both the upper and lower classes.  The aristocracy thus must constantly convince the lower class to regard its members as superior in order to maintain its social stance.
	Burke’s view of social order stands in stark contrast to that of Rousseau.  To begin with, Burke does not see Rousseau’s state of nature as truly natural; nor would he call Rousseau’s idea of primitive society anything more than a mass of independent individuals, not bound, as Rousseau postulates, by any of the natural forces of similar climate or lifestyle.  He, in fact, refers to civil society as a state of nature that is far more in line with natural inclinations than is the savage, antisocial existence imagined by Rousseau (Burke 46); and this variance makes all the difference for Burke.  He assumes that the human is always led by reason as opposed to raw instinct, and that people united under the laws of reason, which spur the creation of a social contract that uniquely belongs to the group, form a civil society.  He argues that without this formal union, even if large numbers of people are gathered together in a particular place, they simply form a mass of individuals and not a coherent society.  For this reason, Burke regards the beliefs of the majority as irrelevant when there is a mass of people, as the majority does not have any power without the backing of the social structure (41).  Even within a civil society, he views the majority as too abstract to be natural for humans: instead of easily submitting to the will of one tangible person or group of people, the individual needs to be well-trained to understand that he or she is submitting to the will of the majority after each member of the society has had a say in the political process.  Burke further complains that submission to the will of a majority only fosters divisions in the society, as the minority feels bitter in its defeat, and that there must be a very strong power to enforce the general will (42).  He further points out that many contemporary institutions allow for a minority to make a legal decision so as to avoid impassioned but illogical movements by the general masses.
	Burke claims that a natural aristocracy is necessarily attached to a governing body, and that this subjugation of the masses to the aristocracy is very natural (45).  He adds that the aristocracy has the purpose of breeding the next generation of rulers, as the members of this social class are the only ones with the moral upbringing to be qualified for the job.  This group acts in the interest of the masses, but is not so quick to make judgments as are the masses due to the members’ honorable and virtuous upbringing.  Where Rousseau imagines that the upper class must actively subjugate the lower class in order to maintain its social standing, then, Burke claims that the lower class will naturally obey the upper class because this is that group that is most qualified to lead in the decision-making process for the civilization.  Where Rousseau depicts humans as constantly and unnaturally chained to one another in civil society due to the necessity of others for the improvement of social rank, Burke does not see a natural world in which the aristocracy does not rule.  In his view of civil society, the lower class depends on the upper class for fair judgment and insightful leadership; but the aristocracy does not require the services of the lower class, and simply rules because it is the natural way of being.  Any group of people that rebels against this natural structure is, in Burke’s view, in violation of the contract created to become a society, and thus no longer a part of civilization.

In his Division of Labor in Society, Emile Durkheim shows that the progression from a society built on sameness to one built on harmony between parts relies heavily on the development of the division of labor.  By his analysis, such a society is far more cohesive and compelling than one built only upon similarities between people.  Within his discussion of society’s progress, Durkheim portrays the relationship between the individual and society.  As civilization progresses towards a model in which uniqueness between individuals is more important than similarity, the relationship between the individual and society changes due to the emergence of the division of labor.  Durkheim’s analysis of how the division of labor influences organic solidarity is based on his idea that as the individual becomes more important, the division of labor takes the role of connecting the separate entities, creating a kind of solidarity that is based on the individual’s part as opposed to the complete authority of the collective.  Individuality and specialization create a cohesive society, which in turn necessitates more uniqueness for the individuals.
	Prior to Durkheim’s work, Adam Smith’s concept of the division of labor prevailed over economic thought.  Smith discusses the division of labor as resulting from the entrepreneur’s individual self-interest.  According to him, dividing roles between different workers allows these workers to produce more both because they are familiar with the equipment and processes being used and because they do not need to transition between different processes in order to produce the entire good.  It is in the self-interest of the entrepreneur, then, to divide labor between different workers, as this will allow him to sell more of the product and thus increase his own wealth.  When this practice is accomplished in a manner that is always parsimonious, the wealth of the entire society is able to grow, and thus the society prospers and advances.  Durkheim, however, shows that self-interest cannot be the main reason for the development of the division of labor, and that the division of labor does not influence merely economics, but also the social climate of a civilization.  He argues that if people are constantly pursuing happiness, then there cannot be a limit to happiness, because one always needs to strive to obtain more of it.  According to Durkheim, “if [happiness] goes beyond a certain level, the increments it receives produce less and less effect, until they cease entirely to be noticed” (181).  The upper bound on happiness makes it pointless for a person to try finding more of it after a certain point, and therefore the division of labor cannot possibly be founded only on self-interest.  Without the desire for happiness, though, individuals are not motivated to drive progress, which would mean that the division of labor would never have developed.  According to Durkheim, it is not the action of the individual which causes civilization’s evolution, but the pressures of the social environment itself (195).
	Society by definition cannot exist without the conglomeration of individuals.  According to Durkheim, individuals begin to draw together when the human population and population densities increase (201).  An increase in population density leads to greater communication between individuals, and new technologies are developed in order to facilitate a greater need for the transmission of information (Durkheim 203).  As people come into greater and greater contact, they begin to associate with one another.  They become linked together by common beliefs, which eventually are considered to be entirely fundamental by the members of the society.  These common beliefs create a sort of collective mentality, which develops an authority over individuals that is nearly impossible to overcome; in Durkheim’s words, “What constitutes the strength of the collective states of consciousness is…that they are for the most part a legacy of generations that have gone before,” which means that the rules engrained in the collective conscious do not change except over the course of multiple generations (233).  Yet within the confines of these essential similarities, every individual is considered to be exactly the same, and “our personality, it may be said by definition, disappears, for we are no longer ourselves, but a collective being” (Durkheim 84).  Durkheim labels this kind of connection as mechanical solidarity, because it does not allow for the independent action of unique people, only the collective action of the unit.  While the bonds of mechanical solidarity create a force that holds individuals to a code that they see as superior to themselves, then, it does not take the mentality or specific abilities of the individual into account.  Thus, while it binds the collective members of society together, it does not unite them on a personal level, meaning that the consolidated society acts only as a repressive mold and not as a facilitator of need-based relationships.
	 Because humans each have an independent sense of awareness, though, mechanical solidarity cannot be the only foundation of a truly cohesive society. Durkheim argues that when contact between individuals increases due to greater population density, “[s]ocial life, instead of concentrating itself in innumerable small foci that are distinct but alike, becomes general,” and people begin to know one another on a particularized level (201).  These kinds of interactions bring about the realization of differences between individuals, and people begin to be drawn to those who have what they do not possess—in terms of both talents and resources.   As the population continues to grow and become denser, a segmented society ceases to be able to support itself.  In order for all of the functions of the society to be carried out, then, individuals must specialize in their activities; thus, “[it is] not that the growth and condensation of societies permit a greater division of labour, but that they necessitate it.  It is not the instrument whereby that division is brought about; it is its determining cause” (Durkheim 205).  Because this division of labor must happen, then, the activities of each part of the society are necessary and valuable to the sustenance of the society as a whole.
	As the population continues to grow and condense, the original divisions within the labor force are eventually filled by multiple individuals.  According to Durkheim, this overlap of individuals occupying the same niche cannot occur—not all of the individuals would be able to survive under the conditions of competition.  Instead, he suggests that roles simply become further divided, saying that “[i]f labour becomes increasingly divided as societies become more voluminous and concentrated, it is not because the external circumstances are more varied, it is because the struggle for existence becomes more strenuous” (208).  In order to distinguish themselves as individuals, people separate their functions from those held by others, creating a society where talent in a small specialization is far more valuable than holding a great breadth of roles.
	Since every position held by an individual in the society is essential to that of another person and to the society as a whole, a new form of solidarity arises along with the division of labor.  This cohesion, which he terms “organic solidarity”, is based on the fact that individuals are different from one another and that these differences allow society to thrive.  According to Durkheim, organic solidarity allows the component individuals to function not in a collective, unitary manner, but in a harmonious way (85).  This concord allows the society to become more unified in its progression, and, as Durkheim says, “the more extensive [individualism] is, the stronger the cohesion that arises from [organic] solidarity” (85).  His logic comes from the human need to recognize one’s own individual endeavors along with those of the society of which he or she is a part.  In contrast with mechanical solidarity, which “is at its maximum when the collective consciousness completely envelops our total consciousness, coinciding with it at every point,” organic solidarity requires the consciousness of the individual (84).  As people recognize that they need others for their individual talents and functions, a stronger bond is formed between them.
According to Durkheim, when organic solidarity develops, “the collective consciousness leaves uncovered a part of the individual consciousness, so that there may be established in it those special functions that it cannot regulate” (85).  Because each individual is incredibly important, then, the general order for society requires that independent thought develop and take a role equally as essential as the collective thought, if not more so.  The tenets established when mechanical solidarity was prevalent, though, do not disappear.  The division of labor only occurs within the structure of an existing society, which means, of course, that there must be a civilizaton founded on some basis (Durkheim 218).  The groundwork for this society has to be commonality, meaning that every society has an element of mechanical solidarity to it from its beginning.  In Durkheim’s words, “there exists no moral force superior to that of the individual, save that of the collectivity,”(43)  and whatever social structure emerges from this environment “bears its stamp” (221).  Since the division of labor arises out of a segmented society bound together by mechanical solidarity, the evolution to a social relationship connected by organic solidarity is marked by the rules established by the collective, and individual thoughts are necessarily colored by these limits.  The individual, then, is both influenced by the society of which he or she is a part and a necessary component of the collectivity.
The social pressures established by the collectivity, though, do not amount only to thoughts.    Says Durkheim, “If we specialise it is not so as to produce more, but to enable us to live in the new conditions of existence created for us” (217).  This means that the division of labor arises out of both raw survival needs and social pressures.  As Durkheim points out, two occupations that are very similar and within the same sphere of influence will compete with one another, and necessarily harm each other economically (209).  The specialization that occurs as a result leads to a new social pressure: since the collectivity becomes accustomed to these specializations, they are regarded as indispensable for the progress of the civilization.  Even though the division of labor requires the expression of individual strengths, then, it is still the interest of the collective which facilitates and conditions organic solidarity.
Durkheim says that “as evolution advances, the bonds that attach the individual to…the traditions that the past has bequeathed him [and] to the collective practices of the group…become loosened” (333).  This is, of course, the result of organic solidarity: if individual growth is important, it will eventually supersede the authority of mechanical solidarity.  However, without the pressures and rules of society, it is impossible to define anything as moral or immoral, as ethics are based on the stipulations of the greater society.  According to Durkheim, this role is taken over by the division of labor (333).  The individual becomes the elementary unit of the society, but this society is still more than just a conglomeration of individuals.  It has become a machine in which all of the parts must work not in unison, but in harmony, and the end function of this machine regulates the activities and interactions of the pieces.  As the social change from mechanical to organic solidarity occurs, then, the fundamental relationship between the individual and society does change, since the individual becomes much more important to the structure of the civilization.  However, the individual can never have an authority higher than that of the society so long as his or her survival depends on interactions with the rest of the population.
According to Emile Durkheim’s Division of Labor in Society, the social progression from mechanical to organic solidarity is based on the rise of the individual’s influence and importance.  As the division of labor develops, it is imperative that people take on unique occupations, which increases specialization and ensures that the individual is significant in the success of the society.  Organic solidarity, then, arises because of the relationships between individuals due to the division of labor.  As individuals take on distinctive jobs, their relationships with one another are dictated by this division of labor; thus, although the individual emerges as an important actor in society, it is still the society as a whole—connected by the new organic solidarity—which regulates behavior and the interaction between individuals.
In Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel’s Lectures on the Philosophy of World History and Karl Marx’s German Ideology, each author criticizes his contemporaries for their infusion of their own biases into the analysis of history.  Both Marx and Hegel state that other German writers of the time do not give true enough accounts of history; Marx in particular complains that his contemporaries are far more inclined to apply an idea to history than to pull an idea from within the process of historical development.  In response, both of these writers give their own accounts of the driving force behind history’s progression.  The key division between Hegel’s and Marx’s depictions of history lies in their concepts of who controls history.  For Hegel, world history is driven by an inherent reason, which is dictated by a universal spirit.  Marx, on the other hand, attributes the progression of history to developments in production, seeing this as a more concretely evidenced rationale for life’s progress.
	In his Lectures on the Philosophy of World History, Hegel delves into both history itself and the way in which philosophy is applied to history.  The writer argues that there are several ways in which history can be recorded and presented: original history, which is comprised of events as they are recorded by their participants; reflective history, which formulates a vision of history as a whole; and philosophical history, which seeks to give a reasonable and general perspective on history (24).  Hegel believes that the unbiased history of a nation only begins when original history can be recorded by those who experience it; all else is subject to the influence of the spirit of the time in which the history is relayed, and thus not objective.  With this in mind, Hegel pursues not a meticulous compilation of original history, but a philosophical approach to history—that is, an understanding of how and why history progresses, as opposed to a simple catalog of facts.  According to him, this comprehension is the aim of history (26).  It is, though, best achieved when the only factors at play are the facts of history, and cannot be achieved when the historian imports his own thoughts into the sequence, whether this is intended to summarize events or to depict them in a more colorful manner.  Hegel’s criticism of other historians lies in his belief that they pursue that reflective history instead of a complete philosophy of history.  According to Hegel, although philosophy is known for its speculative nature, philosophical history does not have the same useless presuppositions utilized by other historians because it is evaluated apart from the era in which the historian exists (24).
	Instead, Hegel proposes that the philosophical approach to history presupposes only the presence of reason in the world (27).  According to him, reason has been proven within the philosophical world to be the material on which all human life is based.  Hegel argues that humans experience life through their use of reason, and that they use this ability to reason in order to change their conditions—that is, not simply to improve their physical existences, but to generate an ideal for the future that can be realized later (27).  He says that reason needs only previously-existing reason in order to continue this process of creating and pursuing ideals.  Since human existence revolves so heavily around reason and the rational progression toward ideals, it seems clear to Hegel that this process continues in the realm superior to the individual.  The spirit governing history, by his account, is that which governs reason and gives reason the rules by which it abides.  To Hegel, though, reason must always prevail through history, and, by this standard, he says that it cannot be influenced by the particulars of any situation (28).  Should factors other than previously formed reasoning influence the process of reason, then reason is no longer truly rational, and the world falls apart, straying from any kind of rule or progression.  Thus, Hegel proposes that world history is dictated by a grand design, whose architect is his “spirit” of history that manifests itself in the activities of whatever nation is convenient at the time.  Because Hegel argues that the only end of reason can be greater reason (27), it is fitting that he believes the end of history’s grand design to be a consciousness of this structure.
	It is not Hegel’s concept of reason that Marx criticizes in German Ideology, but his requirement that history be governed by a grand design controlled by some ethereal “spirit”.  As Marx points out in the beginning of German Ideology, all of the conceptions that other philosophers and historians have posited about human existence and progress are exactly that—conceptions from the minds of humans (176).  He argues that by attributing human practices and behaviors to a power greater than the humans themselves, philosophers—particularly Hegel and those who base their philosophizing off of Hegel’s views—allow their conceptions to get out of their hands.  The thoughts are controlling the philosophers, and the philosophers believe that they cannot control the thoughts.  Marx deems this conception of world history to be nothing more than imaginary, supposing that history cannot be driven by something that is not visibly evident in the world.
	Marx begins his own evaluation of history from what he believes to be the distinguishing characteristic of the human: the production of the means of subsistence (177).  He views this productive ability as a condition of human nature, derived from the physical structure of the human body.  The fact that humans can produce their means of subsistence implies that the production of physical objects becomes an inherent part of existence.  Marx adds that the particular ways in which individuals produce define ways of expressing life, and that the meaning of the human is intrinsically dependent on both what he or she produces and how he or she produces it (177).  Marx’s view of the progression of history is thus dictated by developments in production and property ownership, which he sees as a very visible and tangible evolution, and a result of nothing more than human activity.  He postulates that, through the development of productive processes, a division of labor arises between the individuals, forcing them to cooperate with one another and then establishing a forced and foreign social power over the individuals.  Whatever relationships between humans emerge are therefore results of the environment of property ownership; and because world productive powers by necessity develop simultaneously, the concepts of classes can also only exist in a universal sphere (187).
	Marx argues that his view of history’s advance presupposes not the human inclination to form ideas, but the fact that humans have physical practices which then dictate how they form ideas (188).  In his view, the physical conditions of life influence the conceptual lives of people as much or more than their ideological practices influence their external circumstances, and are thus of equal or greater importance in the study of human praxes.  He criticizes his contemporaries in their glossing over of this kind of physical existence, stating that they assign historical conditions by the way in which the societies view themselves, a practice which emphasizes thought over material being (190).  With his view of revolution in industry and property ownership as the driving force of history, Marx assumes that the material item necessarily influences these kinds of social thoughts, and therefore production and the physical parts of existence cannot be overlooked in the study of history.
	Here is found the obvious opposition between Marx’s and Hegel’s concepts of world history.  Hegel, believing history to be driven only by reason and to be free of the external conditions of individual human practices, provides an explanation of history that seems ethereal and general.  Marx, finding significance in the material production of humans in the formation of society and human progress, regards this more “concrete” process as the foundation of historical advancement.  Marx’s accusations that Hegel has “bowed down” before the general design of history, allowing his own creation to overcome him, though, are perhaps too drastic.  While Hegel undoubtedly does apply an abstract concept to his vision of history’s direction, his abstraction is no less justified than Marx’s.  Where Marx defines the human by his or her need to produce his or her means of subsistence, Hegel’s characterization of the human is as an innately thinking creature (25).  Since he states that the philosophical approach to history is no more than the application of thought to history, and that humans cannot stop thinking, it is justified that some sort of thought is inherent in the production of history.  Reason—which Hegel defines to be the intangible material from which human consciousness and reality is spawned—is by this definition related to thought, and is thus a very human trait (27).  Hegel’s supposition that reason governs the world, then, means only that the basis of human thought and consciousness oversees human reality.  Since he states that thought is involved in every aspect of human existence (25), reason’s role in the development of history cannot be doubted within Hegel’s view of the world.  Even though Hegel’s concepts of the spirit and grand design of history seem very abstract or, by modern standards, fatalist, they—the metaphorical rulebook of reason—are not unjustified by Hegel’s definitions.
	Since Marx and Hegel both use their own explanations of the basis of human existence to justify their claims about the progression of world history, their different accounts of history really seem to result from their different concepts of the human.  Marx himself says that in the retrospective view of history, humans can be distinguished from other animals by their consciousness or ability to think, but that they do not distinguish themselves from animals until they engage in the production of their own means of subsistence (177).  Marx’s argument goes on to say that the course of history is guided by revolution, or the mass decision to overthrow the foundations of the existing system of life (189).  He claims that other writers, such as Hegel, would “deify” the kinds of development controlled by revolution, but this kind of clash of philosophy is nothing more than a clash of definitions.  Hegel regards the development of history as an inescapable design because he assumes that even the laws of physics are a part of his blanket term of “reason”.  Marx’s productive structure for history is also a rational process: the development of the division of labor imposes binding social systems on the human population, and only revolutions can allow these social systems to change.  The differences between them resolve themselves to whether cognition or physical production came first in the development of human awareness, and this contention brings about the differences in Marx’s and Hegel’s approaches to understanding history—material or immaterial.
	Hegel’s Lectures on the Philosophy of World History and Marx’s German Ideology depict different illustrations of the way in which world history progresses.  While both writers approach the course of history with justified logic based on their basic definitions of human existence and nature, they both are faced with the fact that history cannot be approached without some sort of presupposition, whether it is based on that of reason (for Hegel) or the necessity of material production (for Marx).  The surface discrepancy of who is in control of history—a universal spirit or the human laborers—boils down to nothing more than a difference in their applied assumptions; and thus neither argument is more “concrete” or has more “substance” than the other, they simply operate on different definitions of the foundational aspects of human existence.
Defining Injustice through the Works of Martin Luther King, Jr., and Hannah Arendt
	Martin Luther King, Jr., in his various speeches and writings, deals with the issue of justice.  For him, justice implies a sense of equality: all people, regardless of race, should have equal freedom in both law and practice, just as they have equal penalties for breaking the law.  In King’s terms, justice means the deletion of any laws or practices which separate one racial group from another and force that group to live without freedom, a tenet of life itself.  Justice, though, has an entirely different set of implications for Hannah Arendt.  She instead considers it in relation to not only existing laws and practices, but to new ones, and the formation of new challenges to justice.  Her account of Adolf Eichmann’s trial is concerned with the way in which justice was approached in the trial, within the contexts of the formation of Israel and the new class of “crimes against humanity”.  Both King and Arendt regard injustice as the enemy, but their definitions of injustice differ; and these differences, as well as the situations of which they are born, give the works very different flavors and outcomes.
	Through his speeches and writings, Martin Luther King, Jr., addresses the issue of segregation as one of communal importance—which he describes as relevant for not only residents of a certain city, or Southerners, or even blacks, but for all Americans.  He treats the presence of injustice in any city as a mark of injustice everywhere, and thus urges everyone to regard it as a problem which must be dealt with among all Americans; he condemns the notion that residence elsewhere means that one should not take action .  To ignore the fact that segregation is a problem for the collective, and not simply for individual governments, is to pretend that it is much less pervasive than it actually is.  King posits that inequality, which perpetuates segregation, is a result of social attitudes of the collective.  He states that segregation is a limiting force, which blocks black Americans from interacting with white Americans at all; but that desegregation, which eliminates this force, does not end the problem, as it only gives blacks the ability to occupy the same space as whites .  While desegregation allows the opportunity for integration—that is, for bonds between blacks and whites to form on a cultural and spiritual level—it does not create those bonds, and therefore does not foster justice .  King argues that without integration, whites do not regard blacks as people, nor do they grant any kind of freedom to blacks; and blacks therefore have neither human identities nor the ability to live .
	King claims that the refusal to allow integration to occur is the true limiting factor to equality, and is thus the cause of injustice for the blacks.  Although he is inspired by events in which blacks are treated unfairly in employment and in their ability to utilize facilities, he is far more concerned with the representation that they are given in the media and to the masses.  King discusses the fact that, in Memphis, all of the attention regarding the protest of sanitation workers was on the violent aspects of the incident, and that the reasons for the protest were completely overlooked by the press .  The lack of attention on the issues at hand is one of the major reasons why King advocates nonviolent protest: without violence to talk about in the news, the press has far less reason to degrade the black protesters for their white audience.  The blacks additionally have a power over law enforcement when they employ nonviolent methods , according to King, as their punishment for nonviolent protest was far more disarming for the general public than it would have been had they acted violently.  For him, then, inequality and, consequently, injustice exist in both the active treatment of the black people as well as the underrepresentation of their interests in the view of the masses; and the way to right such injustices is to change the mindsets of both black and white society through nonviolent action.
	Hannah Arendt’s dealings with injustice are far different from King’s, in large part because she writes about a different kind of injustice.  While King was addressing the whites’ refusal to give the same laws and ideals equal weight for another race, Arendt questions the justice of law itself through her analysis of Adolf Eichmann’s trial in Jerusalem.  As she points out, the climate of Eichmann’s trial was somewhat unique: Nazis had recently been convicted of a new class of crime, which was still only vaguely defined at the time ; there was indecision about what constituted a war crime, as the technological advancements of the Second World War changed warfare entirely ; and the domain of the State of Israel in arbitrating crimes against the Jewish people was still in question.  This last uncertainty is perhaps one of the most important for Arendt in her account.  As she points out in her report, the Israeli prosecution was sometimes confused about whether it was trying one man for his actions or a representative of all anti-Semites in history.  On the one hand, Arendt states that justice in the courtroom can only put one man on trial for his own crimes, that the trial must be centered on Eichmann alone, as an individual with control over his own actions .  On the other, she projects the tone of the trial as one of making history: for the first time, Jews have the right to try crimes against their own people, and thus are finally able, through Eichmann, to make a statement about anti-Semitism as a concept ; for this reason, it matters less that Eichmann is a man and more that he is a symbol of thousands of years of oppression.  The stage on which the trial is set is, for Arendt, one that is inherently confused, and one on which justice is fairly easily muddled.
	Part of the confusion about justice, in Arendt’s view, comes from the Israeli refusal to acknowledge genocide as a new kind of crime .  As she points out, when looking at Jewish history, the most frequent crime committed is that of an attempt to exterminate the Jews, and stories of survival permeate Jewish tradition.  Thus, this concept of genocide could not have been seen as new, and thus could not have been classified correctly for the crime that it truly was.  According to Arendt, the legal implications of genocide are far from the cultural ones, and the misclassification by the Israeli court changed the principle of the crime .  She states that genocide differs from any crime of the past in that it seeks not to oppress a certain people, but to destroy it—that is, to attack diversity.  Arendt does not emphasize the fact that this attack on diversity was a specific attack on the Jews.  She instead illustrates the situation as having been an assault on all of humankind, which happened to focus on the Jews, although theoretically any ethnic group or race could have been the center point of the crime.  Thus, says Arendt, the crime of genocide, even as it was executed on the Jewish people, was a crime against all people of the world, and in order for justice to be served, needed to be examined through an international lens.
	Because the Israeli court could not see genocide as a new crime, they could not comprehend the type of criminal that Eichmann was.  According to Arendt, the depiction of Eichmann as in individual criminal was thrown into disarray in part by the prosecution .  The ability to ascribe to him a number of crimes which he did not commit in order to bring to light the atrocities of the Nazis depended wholly on the assertion that Eichmann was like other people and therefore not a hideous fiend.  And, as Arendt points out, Eichmann was unlikely to truly recognize that his own actions were wrong.  The rhetoric of the Nazis allowed people like Eichmann to disconnect themselves from their crimes and from those other officials who made the decisions to implement the Final Solution  .  Additionally, Eichmann was subject to the rules of a society that were far different from those of his judges: although what he believed was undoubtedly based on a series of contradictory lies and catchphrases, these rules still dictated for him what should be considered truth .  As a result, the court in Jerusalem executed justice on a man who had not been subject to the same concepts of right and wrong, and whose place could easily have been taken by any number of other susceptible, ordinary citizens of Germany.  In Arendt’s view, Eichmann was therefore brought to justice not for his own crimes, but for the sake of seeking justice, and was found guilty because this sense of justice needed to be manufactured .
	For Martin Luther King, Jr., justice holds an absolute value.  It is a result of equality and perpetuates equality; it is the adherence to the basic beliefs upon which a society is founded, universally, without question.  Yet, for Hannah Arendt, justice cannot be so simple.  It is not owed to the victims by history, and it is malleable according to the new demands of society and emerging world views.  Because King sees justice as so easily defined and visible, he is optimistic about achieving it in the near future; Arendt shows less confidence, as for her the definition of justice and its implications are still in the works.  King and Arendt both believe that injustice is the enemy, which needs to be rooted out in order for the modern world to survive and progress; yet their dealings with injustice are entirely different because of their separate ideas of what it is or can be.

The study by Birch and Bloom reveals bias in false belief experimentation when subjects are presented with specific, plausible knowledge.  A similar effect can be experienced during multiple-choice testing.  In a multiple-choice test, there will is a single correct answer, which a tester will try to identify.  This task is particularly simple if the test taker is confident about a single response.  If a tester can identify only one plausible answer, it is logical to choose that answer, just as subjects ignorant of the violin location primarily chose the original container.  
	Uncertainty about an answer will often result in identifying two or more plausible answers.  In this situation, a tester becomes torn and may be able to justify picking multiple answers, while knowing that only one can be correct.  This situation is unique from the experiment because the correct answer is unknown, but there are parallels after the tests have been graded and returned.  If a question was incorrect, a tester will often feel worse if the correct answer was considered plausible.  Even though the tester ultimately chose a different answer, it is common to feel regret and believe that one almost chose what is now identified as the right answer because there was a perceived reason to pick it.  This feeling is analogous to the knowledge-plausible experiment group, which showed bias toward the red box because subjects knew that it was the actual location of the violin, and there was a rational explanation for choosing it—the blue box was initially placed there.  A tester will generally feel less upset if the answer turns out to be a choice that was not considered plausible, because there is no notion of nearly choosing the correct answer.  Birch and Bloom’s knowledge-implausible subject group demonstrated no bias toward the purple container because that location was considered unreasonable, just as the tester who never considered the correct answer as reasonable feels less regret.
Because of the mind’s role in processing the things we see, what appears to be true may not match up with what is actually there.  When viewing an object, our mind considers the information it is given, draws on common patterns and prior experience to determine the most likely scenario, and interprets this as what we are seeing.  However, we saw both in the lecture and reading that the mind automatically makes assumptions.  When we view an image that breaks from regular patterns, these assumptions are wrong and our mind can be tricked into believing something that is not reflected in reality.  Imagined lines connect to form a cube that is not there, and assorted lines can be interpreted as solid objects.  Even when we are conscious of the illusion, the effect continues to deceive the mind.
	In much the same way, Sleights of Mind relates how Apollo and other magicians take advantage of the assumptions of the mind by leading the audience to search for patterns.  “A good conjurer exploits the human compulsion to find patterns” in order to make the audience expect a particular outcome.  However, a good magician will in fact be following a separate pattern that appears similar and is interpreted as the same by the brain, but will lead to a different, and thus unexpected result.  Thus, the mind does not give a perfectly accurate depiction of what we experience.  In fact, as Grr, Sniff, Arf addresses, we are constrained by the limitations of our own “umwelt” and there is nothing to say that the way in which we perceive the world is any better than the entirely different point of view from which a dog experiences reality.

s week’s readings explore the development of the mind in infancy.  The research by Spelke and Kinzler reveals compelling information about the roots of bias in society.  From wars between nations to discrimination against particular individuals and social groups, conflict far too frequently creates strong divisions between individuals in today’s world.  Spelke and Kinzler pose the question of whether there exists any predisposition in infancy towards bias against a particular group, and if so, is it a result of early learning based on the environment in which one is brought up, or is it instead an inherited trait, simply part of one’s nature.
As Woodward discussed in lecture, neither nature nor nurture by itself explains the observations made about infants.  Piaget’s examination of the sensori-motor period outlines in six stages a typical process of natural development.  Within this natural development process, the infant observes and reacts to its environment.  In discussing infants in Stages 3 and 4, Piaget notes: “We also observe discomfort in the presence of persons who are strangers to the milieu (R. Spitz), reactions to the strangeness of situations (R. Meili)” (Piaget, Inhelder 24).  This observation would clearly not take place unless infants were aware of and affected by their environment.
Spelke and Kinzler’s experiments identify similar results revealing an infant’s familiarity of and preference for a particular language.  It seems unlikely that infants consciously discriminate against strangeness, but perhaps unfamiliarity with alternate environments promotes the potential for bias later in life.  However, Spelke and Kinzler’s results imply that further understanding of cognitive development may reveal ways to promote change and deter the effects of preference for one’s own language or race.  In particular, they note that “3-month-old infants’ preference for own-race faces is moderated by exposure to other-race faces” (Spelke and Kinzler 93).  Thus, there is hope that greater understanding of development may lead to promotion of unity and prevention of bias. 
The experiment’s by Pica and others regarding the Mundurukú and their understanding of number concepts provides interesting insight into the relation between language and numbers.   Because the Mundurukú lack words for numbers larger than five, they are unable to pass exact number representation tests when dealing with large sets, while they are accurate in trials with numbers below five.  Furthermore, they succeed with number approximation tasks with large quantities without any way to precisely quantify these amounts.  This observation supports the argument of Feigenson, Dehaene, and Spelke regarding the existence of a core system for approximate representations of numbers in addition to a separate system for precise representation of small numbers.
	A question to consider is the relation between the Mundurukú language and their understanding of numbers.  In light of Carey’s description of the development process for understanding the concept of integers and the successor relation, it seems that the Mundurukú never become “three knowers” as, “with the exception of the words for 1 and 2, all numerals were used in relation to a range of approximate quantities rather than to a precise number” (Pica 500).  Since the Mundurukú never advance beyond this stage, they certainly never develop the connection between numbers in general and their connection to discrete objects. 
	Interestingly, the Mundurukú language reflects the basic knowledge of numbers described by the two core systems in the Feigenson paper.  The Mundurukú only have words for the precise quantities one and two, which correspond to the second system of exact representation of small quantities.  The Mundurukú do, however, have words to compare approximate quantities.  For quantities from three to five, there are words that relate to, but do not represent the exact quantities.  The Mundurukú also use words with meanings such as one hand, two hands, some, not many, and many.  Why might the Mundurukú have these words in their language but not others?  Perhaps these words arise from an innate understanding of the exact representations for one and two, and an innate ability to compare varying sets of approximate quantities.

This week’s readings and lecture focus around the concept of animal consciousness.  Consciousness is difficult to define and identify experimentally, but it is not an unapproachable or unscientific topic.  This point was emphasized by Mateo in lecture through the many examples of animals exhibiting learning, imitation, and problem solving.  Griffin also expounds this point in challenging common arguments to the contrary, which fulfills the suggested step (A) that we “Start Thinking About the Possibility” (Griffin 619).
	Mirror tests are one way of testing for self-recognition in animals.  Gallup describes the study conducted for chimpanzees, which indicates that chimpanzees are able to make the connection that they are seeing themselves in the mirror, and not another individual.  While this result has not been replicated for monkeys, the de Waal study indicates that monkeys do not behave the same toward their reflection as they do toward an unfamiliar individual.  This raises the question of how the monkeys do view the monkey in the mirror, which the data is unable to resolve. 
	A further question is whether self-recognition indicates consciousness.  The study suggests that self-recognition in chimpanzees is not innate, because the chimpanzees initially treat their reflection as if it were an unfamiliar partner.  Only after continued mirror exposure over about three days do the chimpanzees begin to change their behavior toward the reflection.  It is tempting to take this result as proof of self-awareness, however to do so would be succumbing to anthropomorphism.  As much as one might like to infer the existence of animal mind, it is also necessary to consider the possibility that experimental results correspond to other biological factors.  One possibility would be an open genetic program as described by Mayr, which could potentially provide an alternative explanation of animal behavior involving unconscious processing of new information.
The article from Seyfarth carries interesting implications about the minds of monkeys.  In the study, monkeys are shown to give and respond to three different alarm calls corresponding to separate predatory threats.  The development of specificity in alarm calls among adults as compared to infants demonstrates that the understanding of alarm calls is not a strictly inherited trait and is likely part of an open system that allows for learning as was discussed in last week’s Meyr reading.  As Seyfarth notes, this learning demonstrates an ability to categorize, and “They behave as though their ability to classify other organisms improves with age and experience” (Seyfarth 803).  The particular nature of this categorization is a question that remains to be explored.
	The referential signaling of monkeys provides insufficient evidence to suggest that great complexity in their categorization, but this does not mean that such a question is not justified.  Anthropomorphism should not lead to dismissal of the issue altogether.  A categorization theory for monkeys or other animals—comparable to Medin’s exemplar theory or Lakoff’s prototype theory for human categorization—would be compelling evidence for existence of animal minds.  The challenge, of course, lies in testing this.  In the case of monkeys the data from alarm calls suggests a distinction based on predatory species compared with other, nonthreatening species.  
	One might consider whether infants understand the danger associated with an alarm call, or if they simply follow the actions of others around them.  For example, if one were to play the alarm call to an infant for a leopard while there was in fact an eagle within sight, how would that individual react?  Running into a tree would show an association of the alarm call with a particular reaction, but failure to understand the specific danger associated with eagles.  In contrast, remaining on the ground or running into a bush would demonstrate an understanding of the threat associated with eagles.  This experiment could demonstrate whether individuals categorize alarm calls according to knowledge of a specific danger, or based on learning of an associated reaction.
I arrive on the newly discovered planet with the explicit instruction to assess the minds of any new creatures.  Upon the team’s discovery of a population of previously unknown creatures, which we name Blobs, I immediately get to work.  Given that we are just as unfamiliar to the Blobs as they are to us, I instruct the rest of the team not to disturb them while I first establish a base from which we can unobtrusively observe the creatures’ natural behavior.
	Following a period of observation, the team helps me isolate a group of Blobs for study.  Fortunately, we have already been able to conclude that the Blobs do have systems for both auditory and visual perception, which will greatly facilitate our experimentation.  I conduct three experiments designed to determine the extent to which their minds share properties with ours and how they differ.  The three properties of mind I will examine are object permanence, memory, and interpreting intent in actions.  These three properties will provide insight into whether the minds of Blobs expand upon, hold onto, and interpret given information.  Of course, I relish the chance to expand upon these initial experiments, which will by no means suffice in drawing any absolute conclusions about the minds of Blobs.
	My first experiment examines whether Blobs understand the concept of object permanence.  In humans, object permanence is just one of many cases in which the mind goes beyond given information to construct our experiences.  Colors, illusions, and depth scaling are other instances of this occurrence.  Though I would also like to test these phenomena, especially to examine whether illusions trick the Blob mind as they do the human mind, I have no way of determining what a Blob sees, nor any way for them to communicate such specific information, either directly or indirectly.  Instead, I settle upon an object permanence test, which offers clearer results.
	Testing Blobs individually, I reveal a piece of food, or a different reward if our initial study of the Blobs indicates that something else would provide a greater incentive. Food need not be the best incentive.  For example, humans might be more motivated by money than food, and dogs more so by their favorite chew toy.  Having revealed the incentive, I promptly conceal it beneath a box.  I expect a Blob that understands object permanence to then search for the reward by lifting the box.  If the Blob searches, but is unable to lift the box, I will adjust the experiment so that the concealed location is accessible to Blobs.  If Blobs give up without searching, then it would suggest that if they do have a mind, object permanence is not one of its features.
	I am also interested in the performance of young Blobs on this test to examine whether this trait exists in infancy.   As Spelke notes in Nativism, Empiricism, and the Origins of Knowledge, there have been studies which “provide evidence that 3- to 6-month-old infants represent the continuous existence of an object that is first visible and then fully occluded” (Spelke 184).  Depending on when infant Blobs develop motor skills, it may be necessary to adjust this task to a comparable one that does not require the infant to move.  Specifically, I would hide the object beneath a box, and then remove the box to reveal either that the object was still there, or that it had disappeared.  I then measure the average time that infant Blobs spend viewing the result, with the expectation that an unexpected result will be viewed for a longer period of time.  If the Blob forms a mental representation of the object in the box, then more time should be spent focusing on the case in which the object has disappeared from within the box.  On the other hand, a Blob lacking object permanence would be equally interested in either outcome, so viewing time should be equal across both scenarios. 
	I design the second experiment to examine the short-term memory of Blobs.  The initial experiment tests their ability to remember a presented image.  I show an image to the Blob subject.  The image is then removed, followed by a buffer period over which the Blob must be able to remember which image it was shown.  At the end of this time, I present three alternate images in addition to the original image.  The Blob then selects one of the four options.  Blobs are prompted to choose an image by pressing a corresponding button.  If it were to turn out that Blobs are unable to push buttons or that they respond better to a different selection technique, then I would make that alteration.  If the Blob correctly picks the original image, then it is rewarded, as in the first experiment, by a suitable incentive.  
	To ensure that the ability to recall the initial image is the only factor being tested, the initial image and alternate images are not the same every time, and which button the correct image is paired with also changes.  I also run an alternate version of the experiment in which I play a sound which the Blob must remember and correctly select from among other sounds after the time has passed.  This tests whether any existing memory mechanism can successfully encode and recall sounds as well as images.  As I come to better understand what senses Blobs use to experience their world, other similar tests could also be performed for these senses, however for now that is left as an area for further study.
	When viewing the results of this experiment, I will be expecting Blobs to perform better than chance if they have a short-term memory span at least as long as the chosen time interval.  That is, I would expect that if Blobs have sufficient memory, then they should on average select the correct button more than a quarter of the time.  It is important to note that a Blob’s memory might exist but work entirely differently from our own.  Thus, a negative result would not indicate that Blobs do not have memory.  However, it would demonstrate that any existing memory mechanism performs differently than ours.  A positive result would suggest that Blob’s are able to recall presented images over the given time interval.  If this were the case, then it would be worthwhile to repeat this test with longer time periods to examine how the passage of time impacts memory, and how it compares to the human ability to store and access information within working memory.
	My third experiment tests whether Blobs interpret my actions as intentional.  This is one of the main features of human folk psychology, and could indicate existence of Blob folk psychology.  The Heider and Simmel study demonstrates that we confer human traits onto mere shapes.  Furthermore, even infants are able to identify intentional actions as demonstrated by the cabinet task study conducted by Warneken and Tomasello that was shown in lecture.  In this study, a man holding a stack of books with both hands enters the room and bumps up against a closed cabinet several times before backing away.  The young child who is the subject of this test observes the man and apparently interprets his actions as indicative of trying to open the cabinet.  As a result, the child then walks over and opens the cabinet door (Woodward 10/18/2011).  I will run a similar test for the Blobs.
	Given that human folk psychology is universal and develops naturally from infancy, I will test the Blobs for both presence and early development of similar folk psychology, by testing their recognition of intent.  Blobs divided into three age groups will be observed in a reaching test.  The age groups should be comprised of infants, young children, and adults.  For the final experiment, I place an object out of my own reach in a Blob enclosure, leave it there, and then reach for it and examine how the Blobs respond.
	First, I establish controls for my experiment.  I choose an item that Blobs are able to transport on their own, so that they may freely move the object toward or away from me.  This item should also be one that generally does not interest Blobs.  To confirm that this is the case, I place this item in the Blob enclosure beforehand, and then check that Blobs do not change their normal behavior and leave the item alone when it is placed in the enclosure.  The second control will be me placing my arm into the Blob enclosure without the item present.  I record any noticeable changes in behavior.  Unlike the object itself, it is okay if notable changes occur as long as they are consistent.
	For the experiment itself, I administer the test to each of the Blobs individually from outside the enclosure.  I first drop an item into the enclosure, barely out of my own reach.  I leave the object there to ensure the Blob does not react, which should be in conformance with the control test.  I then reach my arm into the enclosure and make a show of straining to reach the object.  If the Blob makes the connection between my outstretched arm and an intention to reach the object, then I expect the Blob to move the object toward my hand.  Alternatively, it is conceivable that the Blob understands my intentions but does not wish for me to reach the object.  If this case, then I would expect the Blob to move the object farther out of reach to ensure that I cannot get to it.
	In either case, recognizing intent is paired with an expected reaction that is notably different from previous behavior.  Moving the object in any direction indicates a definitive departure from behavior in the object control test.  Blobs that do not make a connection to my intentions would be expected to exhibit the same behavior as recorded in the second control test in which I place my arm in the enclosure.  If results indicate that Blobs consistently move the object, then this suggests Blobs do interpret some intent in my actions.  I would consider such a result as evidence of a possible Blob folk psychology with human similarities.  Furthermore, upon review of the results for the three age groups, I would expect to see very similar results if the development of folk psychology follows a similar pattern in Blobs and humans.  Negative results overall or in any of the three age groups is not sufficient evidence to conclude that Blobs do not have a folk psychology, but it would suggest that Blobs do not identify the intent which humans inherently recognize in my outstretched arm, and therefore any existing folk psychology would be fundamentally different from our own.
	In conducting these experiments, it is necessary for me to carefully consider the information which the results from each experiment provide.  I can address the likely implications of any particular dataset, but given that I am dealing with an entirely unknown creature on a foreign planet, it would be hasty of me to jump to any conclusions about the minds of Blobs.  In particular, anthropomorphism could lead me to assign the Blobs human traits that are not in fact present.  Conversely, the Blobs may possess mental mechanisms not found in any species on earth and entirely undetectable in the experiments I have set forth.  As such, my experiments and their conclusions are meant only as a starting point toward understanding these new Blobs.  With that in mind, I look forward to discovering these Blobs, performing the experiments, drawing any justified conclusions, and using the knowledge I have acquired thus far as a psychologist to contribute to the extraordinary discoveries my team has made in exploring this new planet.
There is much evidence to suggest that human memory has a framework that is comprised of two separate systems, which independently process explicit and implicit memory. Warrington and Weiskrantz (1968) tested amnesic patients on a task related to prior experience.  They found that although the patients had no recollection of the initial priming events , there was definitive evidence that their prior experiences influenced their performance.  This shows that while amnesia affects their episodic memory, other components of memory are still intact as the experiments demonstrate the effects of priming, which take place within implicit memory  (Toth, 2000).  The experience of déjà vu also suggests a dual memory system.  Specifically, this experience is marked by a noted sense of familiarity without being able to identify its cause.  Brown (2004) posits that one may implicitly process an object without recognizing it, leading to a feeling of familiarity that is then overgeneralized to apply to the entire situation.  In this case, there is conflicting information in the explicit and implicit memory systems, which elicits a déjà vu experience.
	It is also a possibility that humans have a unified memory system, in which conceptual and perceptual processing take place.  Conceptual tests may use general knowledge such as object categorization questions to test various levels of processing, while perceptual tests include word and picture naming (Toth 2000).  Both types of processing can be tested under the conditions of implicit memory. If the implicit memory system operates independently, then implicit tests of conceptual and perceptual processes should yield similar results.  However, based on the unified memory hypothesis, one would expect different results from conceptual and perceptual processing .
Human acts of charity and good will occur in many forms each day.  Yet so often, it seems, such actions can be traced back to personal benefits that offset the cost or inconvenience of helping someone out.  Evolutionary theory would suggest a genetic predisposition against altruism.  However, it is possible to see that these ideas are not necessarily contradictory.  Furthermore, evidence suggests that empathy is an evolutionary trait that promotes altruism.
	There are many ways of defining altruism.  While some definitions of altruism require that a helping gesture may not be prompted by expectations of personal gain, for the purposes of this paper acts will be classified as altruistic if the primary purpose is to help another while involving self-sacrifice.  According to traditional Darwinian evolutionary theory, over time, a population should trend toward producing individuals with the highest inclusive fitness, or probability of surviving to reproduction.  A gene promoting altruism implies a reduction in inclusive fitness of the possessor, while increasing the fitness of others in the population.  But if this were the case, then through evolution, individuals without the altruism gene should be preferred based on survival of the fittest.  As such, species that have evolved, including humans, might be expected to behave purely selfishly.  This being the case, one could conclude that there are no genuinely altruistic acts.
	Based on this apparent logic, is it necessary to discount either altruism or evolution?  Carter (2005) argues that this is not the case.  He uses supergame theory, playing many iterations of the same game, in order to simulate the evolution of altruism and show that given certain circumstances, genuine altruism can survive within a population while remaining consistent with evolutionary theory.  Carter considers the Prisoners’ Dilemma, which involves two criminals arrested for a small offence, but known to be responsible for another major crime.  Each is separately given the offer to testify against the other in exchange for a reduced sentence.  The situation, then, is that regardless of what the second person does, it is always better for the first criminal to defect.  Typically, both criminals choose the selfish response of defecting.  Had they both chosen instead to cooperate, both individuals would have received a lesser sentence.  The same principles apply to another version of the dilemma involving monetary benefits that are higher for mutual cooperation than mutual defection, and such that given one player’s choice, the second player is always better off defecting.  Carter’s analogy is that defectors behave selfishly, while choosing to cooperate is comparable to altruism, as cooperation helps the other player while reducing the reward for the cooperator.
	While defecting is always the better choice for one round of this game, there are more favorable strategies for playing the same game over multiple rounds.  Carter first shows that selfishness is not necessarily the best strategy via comparison with a strategy of conditional cooperation, or defecting only if the other player defected in the previous round.  Against other cooperators, it is mutually beneficial to never defect, so such players do better than a conditional cooperator and an unconditional defector, who will continue to mutually defect after the first round.  So in a population with mixed strategies, conditional cooperation is best.
	Furthermore, Carter identifies that a population of predominantly cooperators could support not just conditional cooperators, but also the genuinely altruistic unconditional cooperators, who always cooperate regardless of the other player’s strategy.  Furthermore, because of the favorability of cooperation over defecting in such a community, the cooperators would have an advantage over unconditional defectors.  Carter thus concludes that it is possible to maintain a stable community of cooperators, including altruistic unconditional cooperators.  While Carter’s is a purely theoretical approach, his logic demonstrates that it is not reasonable to discount an evolutionary explanation for altruism, as the two concepts may not be incompatible.
	Carter raises an important distinction between conditional and unconditional cooperators.  Unconditional cooperators are genuinely altruistic because they always accept a reduction in reward to increase the other player’s reward.  While conditional cooperators may also seem to act altruistically, their cooperation is based on the expectation that they will succeed over time.  This is an example of reciprocal altruism, which refers to the concept that certain actions that are unfavorable in a particular instance can actually benefit the performer of the action over time (Trivers, 1971).  Reciprocal altruism reflects the idea that helping an individual may make the same individual more likely to return the favor later.  In this way, the anticipated reward is greater than the risk taken in performing the apparently altruistic act.  In essence, the primary purpose of a reciprocal altruistic act is accruing long-term benefits.  Thus, reciprocal altruism is different form pure altruism in that it can be considered selfishly motivated.  As Carter shows, conditional cooperation is the optimal strategy in his supergame simulation even though each instance of cooperation offers a lower reward than defecting.  Conditional cooperators choose to cooperate not because they can help the other player, but because by selecting that strategy, they will be better off over many rounds of the supergame.
	Empathy is a critical concept in the expression of altruism.  Individuals empathizing strongly with others means that they are better able to experience pleasure from performing helping actions, thus they should be more willing to act altruistically.  Such a scenario suggests that expression of empathy can promote altruism.  This implication has been strengthened by experimental results.  Krebs (1975) set up a test in which subjects believed they were observing another participant performing a different role in the study.  However, the participant was only a performer cooperating with the experimenter.  Participants were split in half, and were made to believe that they were either similar or dissimilar to the presenter.  Each group was further divided and led to believe that the performer was playing a roulette game in which the stakes were either rewards (money) and punishments (electric shocks) or performance of simple motor and conceptual tasks.
	After observing the experiment run with the performer, which was designed only to set up this last task, the subject was given the opportunity to establish the stakes for a final bonus round.  In this part, subjects could choose the potential outcomes for the presenter’s reward and punishment, while they received anything left over.  For example, they could choose to give the performer up to $2.00 while keeping the remaining money on a win, and also had a choice of what percentage of a maximally painful shock they would make the performer observe on a loss, again while agreeing to absorb the remaining strength of the shock.  This final decision was used to measure the degree to which subjects behaved either selfishly or altruistically toward the performer.  The greatest altruistic act, for example, would be to accept $0 on a win and maximal shock on a loss in order to offer the performer $2.00 from a win and no shock on a loss.  The most selfish act would be doing the opposite, claiming $2.00 on a win while absorbing no shock on a loss, leaving the performer with the options of $0 from winning or a maximal strength shock from losing.
	The goal of the experiment was first to measure empathy for the performer and then determine to what degree experience of empathy toward the performer was related to the choice to act altruistically.  Empathy was measured both through explicit posttest questioning of the participants, and through measurement of psychophysiological responses recorded throughout the experiment.  Although the statistical significance related to the induction of empathy was low, the consistency of trends across all subject groups strongly supports the conclusion that the experiment’s attempts to induce relative levels of empathy were successful.
	Results confirmed the experimental hypothesis that individuals who thought they were observing a similar performer receive rewards and punishments chose to act most altruistically.  Specifically, “The major finding of this study was that subjects who experienced the strongest empathic reactions toward another were most willing to help him, even though it meant jeopardizing their own welfare” (Krebs, 1975).  Essentially, the ability to empathize makes it so that it can be in an individual’s best interest to help another because the reward of helping outweighs the cost of the altruistic action.  Note that although a choice of this nature involves a degree of anticipated reward from the helping action, this response differs from reciprocal altruism in that it is a solitary act with no promise, or even chance, of the favor later being returned. 
	Given the connection between empathy and altruism, it remains to show that empathy is an evolutionary trait.  Evidence of empathy has been observed in infancy.  Sagi and Hoffman (1976) presented one-day-old infants with a tape of either the spontaneous cry of another infant or a synthetic cry, which shared the same properties of length and intensity as the infant cry, but were easily identifiable to adults as nonhuman sounds.  The crying behavior of babies exposed to the cries was recorded and responses to the different cries were compared.
	Results demonstrated that the infants cried significantly more when exposed to the newborn cry than newborn babies who heard either silence (p < .01) or the synthetic cry (p < .005).  One response characteristic of empathy is feeling emotions that match another individual’s emotions.  The fact that newborns cried more when hearing the cry of another newborn indicates an empathy based distress response.  As Sagi and Hoffman note, there remains some possibility that these responses result from a learning mechanism.  Nevertheless, the fact that this study was performed on newborn babies with mean age of 34 hours lends credibility to the possibility that empathy is innate: “The fact that 1-day-old infants cry selectively in response to the vocal properties of another infant's cry provides the most direct evidence to date for an inborn empathic distress reaction” (Sagi and Hoffman, 1976).  Supposing an evolutionary basis for empathy, one might reasonably expect other related species to also demonstrate empathy.  Consistent with this idea, both monkeys (de Waal et al, 2008) and rats (Bartal et al, 2011) have been found to show empathy.
	The de Waal et al. (2008) study gave brown capuchin monkeys a choice between two tokens.  Both tokens offered the same reward for the subject, but the prosocial token additionally provided a partner with the reward as well.  The first monkey received the same reward from either token, so there was no direct cost to selecting the prosocial token.  If there were no reward implicit in conferring a reward on the partner, then one would expect that neither token would be preferred.  Thus, there would be an equal probability of the monkey choosing either token, so the expected value for percentage of prosocial choices would be 50 percent.  Instead, what the researchers found was that the capuchins selected the prosocial choice significantly more than 50 percent of the time.  This indicates that monkeys garner some reward from the choice to give to the partner, and de Waal et al. ascribes this effect to empathy.
	The Bartal et al. (2011) experiment examined the behavior of rats when presented with restrainers, which the rats learned to open.  Initially, some restrainers held trapped cagemates, while others were empty.  Generally, rats would not open the door of a restrainer unless there was another cagemate.  A group of rats was later tested with restrainers containing either cagemates or chocolate chips.  Rats responded as quickly to the chocolate containing restrainers as they did to the restrainers with cagemates, indicating the reward of chocolate is comparable to freeing a trapped cagemate.  Furthermore, the rats could eat all five chocolate chips, and did so in the case where no cagemates were present, but when there were trapped rats present, they instead opted to eat fewer chips, leaving the remainder for the trapped rat.  This suggests that rats experience some reward not just from freeing the rat, but also from the prosocial action of sharing the chocolate, both of which support the conclusion that the rats perform helping behavior as a result of experiencing empathy.
	While concepts of altruism and evolution may initially seem contradictory, further analysis shows that this is not necessarily the case.  A strategy based upon reciprocal altruism may provide the most benefit to individuals over time, but this does not rule out the survival and expression of genuine altruism in other individuals, so an evolutionary basis for altruism and standard evolutionary theory should not be considered mutually exclusive concepts.  Empirical evidence supports the theory that stronger experiencing of empathy promotes altruistic actions.  Thus, identifying an evolutionary basis for empathy would suggest that the same is true of altruism.  Evidence of empathy in one-day-old infants reveals a strong possibility of an innate mechanism for empathy.  Furthermore, if empathy were an evolutionary effect, then one would expect related species to also express empathy.  Indeed, research reveals that both rats and monkeys exhibit degrees of empathy.  While other explanations cannot be discredited, the results shown here are consistent with the claim that empathy is an evolutionary development that moderates altruism.

REFERENCES:

Bartal, I. et al. Empathy and Pro-Social Behavior in Rats, Science 334, 1427 (2011).
Carter, A. Evolution and the Problem of Altruism, Philosophical Studies: An International Journal for Philosophy in the Analytic Tradition, Vol. 123, No. 3 pp. 213-230 (2005).
De Waal, F.B.M. et al. Giving is self-rewarding for monkeys, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, Vol. 105 Issue 36, p13685-13689 (2008).
Krebs, D. Empathy and Altruism, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Vol 32(6), Dec 1975, 1134-1146.
Sagi, A. and Hoffman, M.L. Empathic Distress in the Newborn, Developmental Psychology, Vol 12(2), Mar 1976, 175-176.
Trivers, Robert L, The Evolution of Reciprocal Altruism, The Quarterly Review of Biology, Vol. 46, No. 1 (Mar., 1971), pp. 35-57.


ABSTRACTS:
Bartal et al:
Whereas human pro-social behavior is often driven by empathic concern for another, it is unclear whether nonprimate mammals experience a similar motivational state. To test for empathically motivated pro-social behavior in rodents, we placed a free rat in an arena with a cagemate trapped in a restrainer. After several sessions, the free rat learned to intentionally and quickly open the restrainer and free the cagemate. Rats did not open empty or object-containing restrainers. They freed cagemates even when social contact was prevented. When liberating a cagemate was pitted against chocolate contained within a second restrainer, rats opened both restrainers and typically shared the chocolate. Thus, rats behave pro-socially in response to a conspecific’s distress, providing strong evidence for biological roots of empathically motivated helping behavior.

Carter:
Genuine altruism would appear to be incompatible with evolutionary theory. And yet altruistic behavior would seem to occur, at least on occasion. This article first considers a game-theoretical attempt at solving this seeming paradox, before considering a "group selectionist" approach. Neither approach, as they stand, would seem to render genuine, as opposed to reciprocal, altruism compatible with the theory of evolution. The article concludes by offering an alternative game-theoretical solution to the problem of altruism.

De Waal et al:

Helping and sharing among humans is often motivated by empathy and accompanied by a sense of satisfaction. To determine whether similar self-rewarding mechanisms may underpin assistance among nonhuman primates, eight female brown capuchin monkeys (Cebus apella) underwent testing in a simple choice paradigm. Paired with a partner, subjects could select either a "selfish" option that rewarded only themselves, or a "prosocial" option that rewarded both of them. Subjects systematically favored the prosocial option provided their partner was a) familiar, b) visible, and c) receiving rewards of equal value. Prosocial tendencies increased with social closeness, being lowest toward strangers and highest toward kin. That the monkeys understood the options was suggested by greater orientation to the partner during prosocial than selfish choices. Prosocial preferences were reduced by inequity, when the partner received a superior reward. If the view between both monkeys was blocked, choices became strikingly selfish. Thus, under certain conditions, delivering benefits to others seems gratifying to nonhuman primates.

i“I have greatly sinned…in what I have done, and in what I have failed to do.”  So runs the Catholic Confiteor, a central prayer of the sacrament of Confession. Tomás Gutiérrez Alea’s La Ultima Cena is run through with questions of sin and guilt and salvation, questions posed very obviously in the light of the Catholicism of colonial Cuba. Count Conde acts the part of the pious plantation owner—he erects churches to God, proselytizes his slaves, and makes a show of humbling himself to them. He is the spitting image of the “good master.” However, in his relationship to Don Manuel, Count Conde’s aping of piety is revealed not only as hypocrisy of the highest order, but also as the mechanism by which he has come to sin. This sin, when put into discourse with the heavily Catholic themes of the movie, becomes the archetype for the sins of a willfully blind society, one which is willing to tolerate the abuses of the overseer in return for sweet sugar. This archetypal sin serves in turn as the basis for a critique not just of colonialism and the Atlantic slave system, but much more importantly of modern modes of production and consumption.  
	While Count Conde attempts, up until the climax of the film, to act as the enlightened, good master, his relationship with Don Manuel reveals him as a hypocrite from the first moments of the film. The movie opens with Don Manuel’s vicious abuse of the slaves of the plantation, but moves quickly to the big house, where Count Conde is arriving. If the viewers stopped watching here, they would know all they would need to know about how the plantation is run. However magnanimous Count Conde acts towards the slaves when he is on the plantation, however many feasts he throws them, he does not run the plantation day to day. Like most plantation owners, Count Conde lives back in the motherland, and leaves the everyday running of the plantation to underlings. This is in part because living in the motherland is more appealing, but is also to a large degree a move to insert a barrier between Count Conde and the immoral means of his fortune. That barrier is the foreman. The foreman not only takes care of the running of the plantation so that the Count may have the time to enjoy his wealth, he also frees him from acknowledging the moral horrors from which his wealth has sprung. Count Conde has almost certainly never disciplined a slave himself, and it is likely that up until the events of the film, he probably never ordered their punishment, either. The foreman, embodied in Don Manuel, provides Count Conde with the thinnest veneers of moral deniability, a veil which, in Don Manuel’s death, is stripped away to reveal the evil at Conde’s heart. Thus, when Count Conde is drunk, he calls Don Manuel a bastard, for he is able to admit to himself that in Don Manuel lies his own damnation. Yet when he sobers up in the morning, his able once again to establish himself as morally separated from the foreman the foreman’s abuses, while morally condemnable, are necessary to maintain the mode of production, and do not reflect on Count Conde himself. Such rationalization is obvious as such to any viewer regardless of their background, but in the specific Catholic context of Cuba, and with reference to the Catholic themes of the movie, that rationalization becomes witness to the condemnation of Count Conde’s soul.   
	While obviously a condemnation of Count Conde’s actions need not rely on a Catholic framework, by couching the film in Catholic terms a very specific and developed critique of his actions is brought to bear, one that would be immediately familiar to the Cuban audience of the film. Sin is, within a Catholic context, defined both a positive and negative sense. As in the Confiteor, a Catholic sins not just by doing evil, but by allowing evil to have its way. Thus, regardless of Count Conde’s actual role in establishing the brutality of slavery, he is condemned in his inaction with regards to the prevention of that evil, a condemnation which is exacerbated by his profiting from the system. Moreover, salvation in the Catholic sense is not the prerogative solely of the individual, but is a process which is situated in the community. Whereas in a Protestant conception, salvation is divorced from the acts of the individual, the Catholic is compelled to do good, specifically within the context of the community. In fact, we see very specifically the Count’s attempts at doing these good acts—his disingenuous washing of the slaves’ feet and of sharing a last supper with them gain their redemptive power within this context. But the show of penance does not a clean soul make. No one in their right mind watching these farces could help but see them for what they are; cheap gestures designed to assuage Conde’s guilt. When he kisses the feet of his slaves, he does not do so out of some deep love for his fellow man, a desire to reconcile himself to them. He does it to assume the trappings of a humble, benevolent man. His disgust is etched into his face. The slaves, in fact, are possessed of the clairvoyance to see what the others dare not. For all their master’s posturing, he is yet unrepentant. Thus he remains in sin, for the washing of the feet, while a necessary act of penance, cannot replace the inner penance. That is, penance must be undertaken with the pure intention cleansing oneself, not thinking of one’s own gain. So within the context of a Catholic teaching, Count Conde first sins in his associations with the slave industry, despite his intention to distance himself via Don Manuel, and then fails to achieve salvation through his disingenuous acts of penance. The Count, however, is far from alone in his sin. It permeates the entirety of his society. Slave owner or not, they are all complicit in the sin, and thus all share in the damnation. Count Conde’s sin, then, becomes not just a matter of his own failing, but the very archetype of a society’s sin, a sin which continues to this day.
	More than just providing a criticism of colonial slavery in Cuba, La Última Cena forces the viewer to confront their own complicity in exploitive modes of production. While undoubtedly an exposé of the brutalities of slavery, La Última Cena more generally aims to critique any society which uses moral deniability, or just plain willful ignorance, to enable exploitive labor practices. Such a critique is certainly relevant today—a disturbing amount of the goods manufactured in the present day, particularly consumer goods, are manufactured in conditions little better than slavery. The economic vulnerability of the working class of developing nations makes them particularly open to exploitive practices, with dangerous working conditions, pay little better than sustenance, and inhuman hours abounding. More insidiously than the old means of production, though, these modern methods have perfected the separation between the laborer and the one who enjoys the fruits of that labor. While Count Conde must visit his plantation from time to time, and at least be aware of the atrocities committed there, the modern consumer need not even consider where their goods have come from, what the process of their production has been. In such a situation, a critique like that of La Última Cena is even more necessary, for there is no other means for the consumer to be confronted with the evils of the mode of production.
	The most dangerous of exploitive methods of production hide their evil, separating the consumer from the producer so that the consumer might live guilt free. La Última Cena provides a strong critique of such modes of production and, moreover, couches it in terms accessible to the modern viewer. By then coupling this critique to a brutally realistic portrait of life under slavery, La Última Cena ties makes the inhumanity of these modern modes palpable via the their implicit connection to the slavery of colonial Cuba. Thus while La Última Cena focuses on the moral failings of Count Conde, it ultimately indicts all those who sin, not just in what they do, but in what evil they fail to fight.
The moment of initial contact between previously desperate cultures is often marked by what Wyatt MacGaffey characterizes as a “dialogue of the deaf.”  This dialogue is marked by a mutual misunderstanding of the other’s culture in terms of the markers and signifiers of one’s own culture. So, for example, the Kongoese interpreted Christianity as introduced to them by the Portuguese in terms of their own traditional cosmology and spirituality—understanding baptism, for example, in analogy with their own practices of “initiation into the powers of the dead”.  Black Robe explores these ad hoc methods of interpreting an essentially foreign culture, while also offering commentary on how individuals within these cultures come to make the other intelligible. Even though they have spent several years in each other’s presence, the French and the Huron are still foreign to each other. As groups, they misidentify the intentions and results of the other’s rituals and culture, driving the tragedy of the movie. As individuals, however, they are sometimes able to transcend the barriers of their disparate traditions and, while still understanding the other’s culture in terms of their own, are able to grasp the pure intention at the heart of the other’s actions, and thus forge a uniquely human bond. Thus while the Huron and French cultural traditions remain mutually unintelligible, individuals within these groups are able to have a sublime understanding of the other, one which informs their interactions at the cultural boundary.
	Sprinkled throughout Black Robe are moments of cultural misinterpretation, moments which create the most tragic action of the movie. Although the Huron and the French had been in contact for a reasonable amount of time, to the point where more than a few individuals were conversant in the other’s language, they still had trouble grasping each other’s cultural nuances. In fact, the movie attempts to convey some of this cultural illiteracy to the viewer: the example of the Huron sorcerer who accompanies the band is played up for comedic value precisely to underscore our own cultural assumptions. As funny as his actions may be for us, the sorcerer fills much the same cultural role as the priest, and it is only our inability to comprehend the Huron signifiers that blinds us to this. The movie in fact implicitly ties the two together. The first instance where we meet the sorcerer is immediately after a humorous scene involving Father LaForgue, drawing an implicit parallel between them via comedy. Further, both are often portrayed in the film essentially as useless: the sorcerer cannot paddle or carry weight, and LaForgue’s inappropriate dress and weakness make him more of a liability to the survival of the group than anything else. As an ad hoc means to bridge the cultural intelligibility gap, then the character’s employ their own cultural signifiers to understand the other. Even the above discussion exemplifies this to an extent—while the priest and the sorcerer may fulfill similar roles within the community, to understand one in terms of the other would be a mistake. But if we have trouble situating the sorcerer, so too does he misidentify the cultural signification of acts by the French. Thus, when LaForgue blesses the stillborn child, this is understood by the sorcerer through the lens of his own culture as the stealing of the baby’s soul. Therefore, not only are LaForgue’s actions misidentified, their motivation, too, is moved from compassion into evil. This, along with other artifacts of cultural unintelligibility, becomes a driving force in the decision to abandon LaForgue, which would lead to such tragic results. In an ironic twist, then, the tool which was designed to promote exchange between the Huron and French  becomes the cause of the cultural confusion which drives the characters into tragedy.
	As individuals, however, some of the characters are able to transcend their cultural confines to understand the motives, if not the means, of the other’s actions. Chomina is a prime example of this effect. Throughout the movie, he has no comprehension of why LaForgue does what he does; why he would chose to be celibate is a mystery to Chomina, as is LaForgue’s conception of heaven. For most of the Hurons, these exotic cultural modes make LaForgue into a demon—who else but a demon would refuse women and be able to communicate without speaking or even motioning to another? Chomina, however, sees LaForgue as a man like him, with his own strengths and weaknesses, albeit a man from a strange culture. Thus whereas the sorcerer sees LaForgue’s prayer as a malicious attempt to steal the soul of a child, Chomina not only distinguishes the humanity in LaForgue’s actions, he also manages to correctly identify it as prayer. Similarly, on his death bed, Chomina recognizes that LaForgue’s desire to be with him in his last moments is born from a love he holds for Chomina, even if Chomina cannot understand the cultural mode in which LaForgue expresses this emotion. This capability to catch a glimpse of the undecipherable is not some innate ability of Chomina’s, but is rather born of a willingness to at least attempt to understand the other on the other’s terms—to establish the personhood of the other, a willingness that leads to his deeply human relationship with LaForgue. Chomina is far from the only character in the movie with such a willingness—Daniel’s relationship with Annuka is at least in part due to his openness to her way of life. Thus while the Huron and French engage in the dialogue of the deaf throughout the movie, the movie also postulates that individuals are able to transcend this dialogue through a willingness to rehumanize the other.
	As a corollary to this individual ability to transcend cultural boundaries, a complete understanding o the past requires one to not only speak broadly of cultures and systems, but also to consider the function of the individual within these systems. While it is of course vital to understand the roles of institutions and systems of power when considering historical events, it is also important to situate individuals within this conception as independent actors with agency of their own. As Bruce Trigger argues, an evaluation of the historical record requires “not only an adherence to a model of social forces,” but also an attempt “to understand the manner in which individuals and groups perceived the situation in which they found themselves and responded to it.”  Thus in an attempt to understand why LaForgue baptizes the Hurons, it would be reductionist to argue that his actions were based simply in some ulterior economic motive, for example. To make sense of LaForgue’s actions, one must also have a conception of his individual relationship to the Huron people, a relationship in which he can transcend, to some extent, the cultural barriers between them as motivation for his actions. LaForgue is a particularly good example of why we must apply such a holistic understanding to culturally complex dynamics, an approach that must be applied to the Jesuits as a whole in order to understand their meaning and impact as missionaries. Their role in the New World was rarely clear cut, and whatever the proselytizing mission, they were often at the relative forefront of attempts to bridge the cultural gap between the Huron and the French. These multifaceted and often contradictory roles that the Jesuits played were attributable in large part to the highly individual and autonomous nature of Jesuit missionaries. A complete understanding of the historical record, then, requires a consideration not just of the large scale systems of power, but also of the individual agents within these systems and  their ability to transcend, to an extent, the dialogue of the deaf.
	The interaction of the Huron and the French in Black Robe exhibits what Wyatt MacGaffey charictarizes as the “dialogue of the deaf.” In an effort to facilitate trade and exchange, both the French and the Huron engage in a mutual mischaracterization of each other’s cultural practices in terms for the signifiers of their own. This dialogue, though, is balanced by a capability of individuals within this system to transcend the limits of cultural intelligibility and forge an interpersonal relationship with the Other. This forces the viewer to revaluate history with an eye towards the motives and implicit understandings of the individual agents involved in the production of history, motives themselves based in that very transcendental understanding of the other.
The systemic oppression and marginalization characteristic of colonial encounters requires a systemic resistance. This resistance must be systemic in a two-fold sense. First, it must involve the participation of the whole, or nearly the whole, group, and it must involve the group in an organized, or at least collective, manner. Secondly, the resistance must be oriented towards achieving system-level goals—that is, the resistance must be of a form that cannot be accommodated by the powers that be within the status quo. In order for resistance to bring lasting, meaningful change to systems of oppression, then, it needs to be systemic in its organization and its goals. Such a prescription for resistance, however, runs the risk of ignoring or devaluing individual acts of opposition undertaken by people who are unable or otherwise not disposed to participate in collective action. Such individual acts can have very real benefits for the actor in terms of their rights, materiel conditions, and psychological state. Thus while a systemically organized and oriented resistance is necessary to bring about substantive, lasting change to the power structures of oppression, it is important to also understand the individual acts of resistance which, while they might not bring down the system, do concretely improve the lives of those lone agents who initiate take on the forces of oppression on their own.
	In order to understand the necessity of a resistance which is both organized and aimed at achieving systemic change of the powers that be, we will consider two case studies—the use of the Inquisition by low-born individuals in Latin America as a means to gain power, and the maroon societies of the Caribbean. The unwashed masses within colonial Latin America had few direct means of asserting themselves against the landed and powerful elite. While in theory the court system was available to them to settle grievances, in general most did not have the legal literacy to be aware and take advantage of their rights. Even if they did, they often lacked the resources to pursue a legal recourse. The Inquisition, however, could often provide a roundabout means for them to achieve some sort of semblance of justice. The Latin American Inquisitors were much more concerned with keeping the newly founded Latin American elite in line than they were dealing with the minutia of the day to day sins of the poor. By confessing to some wrong doing, underprivileged people in these societies could often draw the attention of authorities to abuses committed against them. Battered women, for example, would often report themselves as practicing witchcraft in order to draw some official attention to the violence perpetrated against them by their husbands.  Whatever their benefits, however, such individual acts barely amount to effective resistance to the system as a whole. Firstly, they do not challenge the grounds on which their oppression stands—in fact, they actually take advantage of these mechanisms, to an extent. The form of this resistance is thus predicated on the existence of the very mechanisms against which it is acting. Furthermore, because the acts of resistance occur on an individual scale, the system responds to and accommodates them on an individual level, thus avoiding the need for structural change. Thus since it is neither systemic in its goals nor its organization, the use of the Inquisition by underprivileged people in Latin America was ineffective as a form of resistance on a societal level.
	The maroon societies of the Caribbean offer an example of resistance which is systemically organized, but not systemically oriented.  These societies were comprised of escaped slaves and arose wherever slaves were part of the fabric of society, from Brazil to the American South. There were no just groupings of individuals with disparate goals, however. Rather, these communities were often highly organized political units  that possessed their own leaders and rites of initiation, and even entered into treaties with the colonial government.  The concessions obtained from the colonial governments, including the de facto independence often granted in the absence of a formal treaty, applied to the society as a whole, and not just to them as individuals. This marks an important distinction from the minor victories won by individual modes of resistance, and is characteristic of the progress achieved by a systemic organization. It is precisely because of the systemic origins of this resistance that the response too is systemic—because they stand together in their resistance, the authorities must deal with them together. However, the goals of these societies were in general not oriented towards the radical change of the colonial societies. Most of them were simply trying to survive. Colonial authorities were thus able to isolate these societies apart from their own and thereby contain the impact of their resistance. In this sense, granting independence to these societies actually benefited the power structures—by granting them independence, colonial powers were able to cut resistance out of their society and displace it to the wilderness. Thus while maroon societies were systemically organized, their lack of system-oriented goals meant that colonial powers could isolate them and prevent their resistance from having wide-ranging effects.
	While these conditions are necessary for protest to have the radical effect characteristic of true change, it is important not to discredit the crucial ways in which acts of resistance which do not meet these criteria still contribute in meaningful ways to the oppressed. Firstly, while radical change may not be achieved by such actions, they can often still win for the colonial subject concessions and rights which in very real ways improved their condition. So, for example, while the use of the Inquisition by the underprivileged may not have brought about systemic improvements in the lives of the Latin American lower class, it did often help them gain some modicum of power and autonomy. Such acts could even gain rights—in the case of the maroon societies, the rights they gained in their independence were very much real, even if they were circumscribed. Additionally, however, while such individual acts of resistance may not have an immense effect on the external world, they do confer psychological benefits onto the actor. These acts of resistance serve, as Fanon has posited, as a sort of relief valve, either figuratively or literally relieving the “aggressiveness and impulsive violence” of the oppressed . These acts of resistance give the oppressed a way to express this agony that is, if not constructive, than at least not destructive. Moreover, these acts of individual resistance help the oppressed to maintain their sense of their own personhood in the face of dehumanizing power. The individual in their resistance reaffirms themselves as human over and against the totalizing violence of the colonial system. Individual acts of resistance give the downtrodden a rare chance to assert themselves against the forces of tyranny, not only bringing relief to their psyche but also, more pragmatically, enhancing their willingness and ability to work collectively against those forces.
	The production of systemic change requires systemic resistance in two distinct modalities. Firstly, this means that resistance must be organized across an entire group of people, and not confined to individuals, else the system may placate them on individual terms. Secondly, the resistance must have as its goal the upending of the power structure as it stands. More confined movements run the risk of being satisfied without bringing change to the entire system. Despite this reality, it is important not to underestimate the value of individual acts of resistance: they are capable of bettering the lives of the oppressed in real and lasting ways, and of laying the foundation for more global projects. Thus, while a productive resistance should be understood to be systemic in its origins and goals, such and understanding should not devalue individual acts of rebellion.
In his essay Dialogues of the Deaf, Wyatt MacGaffey argues that the initial contact between previously disconnected cultures results in a mutual misunderstand of cultural signifiers, which serves the practical role of enabling commerce and other like activities to flourish even without cultural understanding.  And, indeed, an examination of the cases of pre-colonial Africa and the conquest of Mexico and Latin America attests to the usefulness of this dialogue in facilitating these initial modes of contact. Moreover, however, this simple understanding of the other in terms of one’s own cultural signifiers constitutes the preconditions for the later or concurrent establishment of colonial systems of power. Explicitly, by allowing the society which will eventually become the colonizer to interact in ignorance of the culture of the oppressed, the dialogue of the deaf enables the colonizer to rationalize the colonial project in terms of brining civilization to the colonize; further, it acts as the interface through which the power structures of the oppressor are projected onto the oppressed. Thus the mutual misinterpretation of cultural signifiers that characterized much of the initial contact in the pre-colonial period not only enables, on a pragmatic level, commerce and other types of interaction, but it also set the stage for the colonial institutions that would develop shortly after.
	MacGaffey based his theory of the dialogue of the deaf on pre-colonial West Africa, and returning to this case study can grant new insights into the long-term effects of the dialogue on the development of cultural interaction. MacGaffey documents thoroughly the ways in which this dialogue enabled straightforward, transactional interactions between the Africans of the west coast and the Portuguese and other early European explorers. Such an interpretation is supported by the historical record—for example, the mutual misunderstanding of cultural signifiers played a critical role in the “conversion” to Christianity of the Kongoese nobles, which was itself vital in the establishment of trade relations.  Our understanding of this dialogue, however, is not circumscribed by such immediate, practical concerns On a broader, more conceptual level, the dialogue of the deaf permitted the Europeans to remain ignorant of—and thus, to not accept as valid—African culture.  Left to simmer with other historical and cultural factors, this stew of mis-knowing would eventually lead to a European, and particularly a British, conception of the African as homogenously uncultured and uncivilized, in desperate need of the (civilized, white) European to come save them.  To take a concrete example, Europeans often interpreted various signifiers of African spirituality in terms of a Christian conception of idol and object worship, lumping these distinct African signifiers together into the category of “fetishism”. Such an unnuanced generalization was of course predicated on the interpretation of African spirituality in terms of the cultural lens of the Europeans; the traditions and objects tossed together into the category of “fetish” were of disparate origins, and served different cultural functions. This kind of sweeping oversimplication is made possible through the misidentification of cultural artifacts that the dialogue of the deaf enables.  The story is similar for numerous other African cultural practices, and towards the end of the 18th Century the overall effect was the formulation of a European conception of Africa as the “Dark Contient”, devoid of culture of civilization. 
Purging Africa of fetishism and bringing civilized values to the continent were therefore often cited by colonial powers as justification for their presence in the continent.  Of course, there were certainly ulterior motives for expansion and we should take the European rationale for their actions with a grain of salt, but it is still important to understand the logic with which they justified their actions both insofar as it gives new insight into why they did what they did, and because it tells us about our modern rationalizations. As citizens of a globally geopolitically dominant power, we have a responsibility to evaluate critically the actions of our nations, which requires critique of the motives for such action. More historically, such justifications were probably the actual motivating factor for a large portion of those Europeans involved in colonization; the existence of different system-level motivations does not deny the existence and relevance of other, individual motivations. As Bruce Trigger has argued, a full understanding of the historical records requires an understanding not just of systems but also of individuals and their orientations within those systems.  A full understanding of the effects of the dialogue of the deaf in West Africa, then, must be predicated on both an understanding of the practical ways in which this dialogue facilitated trade and other interactions and also an understanding of the role this dialogue played in the pre-configuration of colonial Africa.
	The dialogue of the deaf was a dynamic that could also play out in less overtly pragmatic ways, as evidenced by the colonization of Latin America by the Spanish. One particularly relevant example, which will be useful in illustrating the full effects of the dialogue, is the identification of the Catholic Devil with local deities, particularly trickster deities. When the Devil was imported to Latin America, it became not the font of all evil and tormenter of men, but rather a source for comfort and hope in bad times, and importantly a source of real, functional magic.  Further confusing this mélange was the importation of bolsas from West Africa, many of which were believed to be imbued with properties due to the Devil.  The result was a tangled web of cultural interactions incorporating the Devil, bolsas and other religious objects, and three distinct traditions of spirituality, each of which interpreted this mélange according to its own understandings. Thus bolsas, for example, were interpreted by the Spanish largely in terms of the notion of idols which, Catholicism had long generated. While the dialogue of the deaf was to a certain extent responsible for the creation of this muddle, it was also the interface by which institutions of colonial power could impose themselves on the colonized. So, for example, the Inquisition relied upon a tacit mutual misunderstanding of spiritual signifiers in order to function in the New World. The Inquisition could only see the cultural objects created in Latin America through the lens of its own signifiers. At the same time, however, the Inquisition needed the object of its inquisitions to accept its cultural authority. In the dual sense, then, the colonized could only see and accept the Inquisition’s authority in the light of its own cultural conventions. The dialogue of the deaf thus functioned in colonial Latin America as the interface through which schemes of power could exert themselves.
	What MacGaffey called the dialogue of the deaf characterized much of the initial contact between civilizations towards the beginning of the colonial period. This mutual misunderstanding of cultural signifiers had practical benefits, as it enabled the establishment of economic and political relations. In the longer run, however, this dialogue provides the necessary conditions for the establishment of the colonial system. This pre-conditioning could take several forms, such as solidifying the unintelligibility of African cultural forms to Europeans, or mediating between different cultural systems for power structures. The dialogue of the deaf, then, not only permitted the establishment of political and economic interaction between Europeans and Pre-Colonial societies, but it also set the stage for the emergence of the colonial system in the years after initial contact.
An understanding of any moment in history requires an understanding of the event itself, of the actual circumstances and historical currents which lead to its transpiring. The events of history place bounds on what may end up as History, to a degree, and at the same time they will have generated a very real and meaningful experience for the people who lived through them. Thus, as students of history, we must strive to understand what happened in the past, as well as the structures and interrelations connecting them and the people who lived through them. Within the Revolution of 1857, the Sepoys formed a driving force as they were not only the backbone of the rebel army, but they also encapsulated the sentiment of the revolution and helped to bridge geographical and social boundaries. They played a critical role in the structural organization of the rebellion, and were crucial in allowing the revolution to transcend the geopolitical boundaries that had confined previous uprisings. Moreover, they played a pivotal role in generating unifying ideologies which bound together various people and provided a model for future revolutions. 
Despite the Sepoys’ important role within the revolution, it would, of course, be a mistake to call the events of 1857 a “mutiny,” as the rebellion was initially labeled by the British. To do so would be to unnecessarily constrict the dimension of the revolution to one merely concerned with military affairs and the treatment of soldiers. While this was undoubtedly an important factor motivating the revolution, it was far from the only, as the mass participation of the peasants and even the local and regional elites attests.  Even within the Sepoys, concerns were not limited to military complaints ; many Sepoys were from agricultural families, and they shared in their families’ concerns over the increased difficulties of tenant farming.  Thus, by considering the Revolt of 1857 merely as a mutiny, one creates an overly simplified picture of the situation which obscures the crucially varied motivations for participation in the rebellion, thus preventing fruitful analysis. Moreover, such an interpretation ignores the history of that analysis, which was used by the British to delegitimize the complaints of the Indians. Thus, in the absence of sufficient evidence that it was, indeed, a mutiny, a view such as this runs the risk of depoliticizing the revolt.
While it would not be correct to characterize the events of 1857 as a mutiny, the Sepoys undeniably played a pivotal role in the revolt, one which was influenced by their position as soldiers. The Sepoys were the first to take up arms against the British in the rebellion of 1857, and everywhere occupied a central position within that revolt. Their position in the military placed them in a central position that bridged the geographical chasms that had isolated previous revolts. Being in the military not only brought them into contact with people from all over the country, but it also gave them a set of common complaints (about the military) not tied to any particular locale, as well as possibly a sense of the universality and legitimacy of many of the complaints of the native Indians. Their status within the apparatus of colonial enforcement provided them with a privileged position from which to develop a broader perspective on the issues at hand. While, unfortunately, we lack first person accounts, we can infer from the actions of the Sepoys that they had some conception of a struggle with a much broader geographical footprint. And, indeed, compared to the previous revolts, 1857 undoubtedly had a grander scope; if the rebels did not yet have a fully developed sense of nationalism, they were certainly on the road to it. As Bipan Chandra rightly points out, it is “significant that the first impulse of the rebels was always to proceed to Delhi.”  Not only a central location for organization and governance, Delhi also functioned as a locus for the burgeoning nationalism of the larger movement, largely due to its central geographical location. Indeed, the military served as a binding catalyst in lieu of another, more fully developed, unifying ideology such as nationalism or anti-colonialism in that it served as a unifying focus, while also providing some of the elements of nationalism, anti-colonialism, and class consciousness as needed. Thus it is not quite fair to say that it filled a void—rather, the military was itself a perfectly valid instrument for organizing and focusing the rebellion on scales otherwise impossible.
 In this aspect, 1857 closely resembles the Boxer Rebellion. In both the rebellion of 1857 and the Boxer Rebellion, widespread malcontent was focused into a directed assault on the perceived colonial powers through the lens of a spiritual, (para)-military organization. While it would be overstating the case to say that such an organization was a necessary component of both revolutions, it certainly was sufficient to allow their respective revolts to transcend local boundaries and enact a national rebellion. Thus, the Boxers and Sepoys came to fill much the same role in their respective rebellions that other concepts such as nationalism or anti-colonialism would in other revolts—providing an ideological and pragmatic locus for the disrepute elements of the revolution. However, the distinction must be made that the army per se was not the ideological focus of the uprising, but rather served as a vehicle that could encompass and transport other elements, such as spirituality and proto-nationalism.
Any understanding of history is predicated on an understanding of the events that underlie that history. Thus, in order to understand the Rebellion of 1857, one must understand the central role that the Sepoys played in that rebellion. As a national organization, they provided a natural source of organization for the rebellion, allowing it to break down those geographical boundaries that had segregated previous revolts. Moreover, though, it provided a vehicle for the ideologies that would serve to unite the populace against their rulers. 
Beyond the events, however, we need insight into the first-person experiences of the persons involved in the events, as their experiences give us insight into these motivations, into the “why” of history. We thus are pressed to consider the individual experiences of people within these revolutions, to consider what their day-to-day lives were like, what they felt, and what they believed. It is, of course, difficult to speak in general terms about the variegated experiences of peoples hailing from disparate socio-economic and even geographic backgrounds. The inherent multiplicity of experiences mandates that any attempt at understanding them be predicated on an understating that any interpretation will not be complete, but will miss or privilege certain experiences. Nevertheless, a well-conditioned attempt can be quite illuminating, revealing the currents of experience on which history was swept.
	In the case of the revolt of 1857, although there is of course no one totalizing experience, we nonetheless see case after case, across caste, geographical, and class lines, of persons subject to abject servitude at the hands of the British. The manifestation of the subjugation of course varied across different social strata and functions. For many of the previous ruling class, subjugation by the British meant a loss of the power that they had previously enjoyed. They were often allowed to keep their titles, some of the revenue of the land they owned, and even some limited control over their populace; yet, in reality, they were typically forced to rule in ways that favored the British agenda. And, indeed, the British were frequently at a loss on how to rule in accordance with local custom, and so simply took a tack that was directly antagonistic to local culture, imposing their own standards and structures upon them.  Such trampling of local custom caused pervasive social stress and a sense of complete powerlessness in the nobility. By way of example, one ruling Brahmin reported that he cross dressed because he felt that “it was a matter of collective shame for all native rulers that the British had managed to enter their land [and make] them subservient to [the British]” and he often dressed as a woman as “his own sense of helplessness and loss of independence had made him feel timid and inadequate like a woman.”  The subjective experience of powerlessness, the inevitable byproduct of disenfranchisement, naturally provoked the nobility into exerting themselves against the British, thus reclaiming their former dignity. 
The nobility of China, by comparison, had maintained most of their power previous to the events of the Boxer Rebellion.  They therefore did not feel disenfranchised to nearly the extent that the nobility of India did. While they may have had their qualms about Western interference, they had not been defeated in battle and made to bend the knee. Thus, compared to the nobility of India, they were not nearly as supportive of the Boxer Rebellion. Whereas many zamidars joined in the Sepoy Rebellion and previous revolts, the Chinese nobility were relatively cold, on the whole, towards the Boxer Rebellion. We see, then, the very real effect that subjective experience has on individual and group decisions, as illustrated in the Sepoy and Boxer Rebellions.
The peasantry of India, too, found itself oppressed by the British, forced to overplant cash crops year after year, to the edge of harvest failure. Unlike the peasantry of China in the run up to the Boxer Rebellion, however, there was no single catastrophic event which cut the legs out from under Indian peasants. Rather, the British pushed the peasantry to produce as much value as possible in as short a time as possible, thus driving them nearly to penury. The methods imposed by the British were not sustainable, whereas the traditional methods were. The peasantry thus found itself disempowered and marginalized, hard pressed to make rent and stay on their land, although they did not face the horrifying threat of starvation that the Chinese peasantry did. The Indian peasantry’s shared experience of marginalization thus provided a powerful motivation to return to the pre-British status quo, one which happened to align with that of the nobility.
Finally, the Sepoys found themselves in the position of being both the oppressed and at the same time part of the mechanism of oppression. This tense dynamic was undoubtedly very conflicting for them. While a position in the military was ostensibly highly prestigious, Sepoys were often denied opportunities for advancement and were paid very little, and considerably less than British soldiers.  Further, the modern drill and military standards imposed on them by the modernizing British army attacked many of their central cultural traditions. To be sure, Indian states had experimented with such modernization in the past, but they had done so in a manner which respected the religious and cultural beliefs of the soldiers. The British method completely disregarded the Sepoy’s traditions; for example, they often required that members of different caste eat together. They, too, then had some motivation to strike back at the British and return to a more traditional mode of existence; and—unique among members of Indian society—they had the means to do so.
Despite the negative experiences imposed by British colonialism, and the visceral reaction against it which prompted so many to take up revolution, one should be cautious of calling them “reactionaries.” Obviously, in the most literal sense, the Revolt of 1857 was a reaction to the British actions in the colony. But in the more useful sense of being opposed to some progressive current, a description of the Revolt as “reactionary” hardly meets the mark. Regardless of whether one considers the British mission in India to be progressive or not in principle, in reality it undoubtedly was not. Thus while the agents of revolution certainly preferred the traditional ways to those imposed by the British, it would overstate the case to say that it was conservative in the sense of being opposed to progressivism. Rather, it was a rejection of the distinctly oppressive regime enforced on them by the British.
A complete understanding of history relies on an understanding of the subjective experiences of those who lived it. It is crucial to understand these people’s motivations in order to understand why they chose to act in the way they did, and that understanding comes from a study of their personal, lived experience. In the case of the Sepoy Rebellion, the experience of the Indian was, broadly, one of subjugation, a subjugation which engendered in the heart of many an Indian the desire to exert one’s self against the British.
Finally, in order to understand the ways in which history interacts with the present, we must seek to understand the ways in which the events and experiences of specific historical moments are turned into myth. The vast majority of people, aside from some academics, interact with the past almost exclusively through mythologizing, and it is through this mechanism that they come to understand how the past and the present interrelate. Mythologies founded in the past form the narrative structures through which the past is made accessible as an object relevant to the present. This form of collective storytelling is integrally connected to subjective experience, as each person builds their own narrative myth via their experience of the events that later constitute history, and is tied to a historical event in that understanding where the mythology deviates significantly from the event can illuminate the motivations—subconscious, conscious, political or otherwise—which facilitated its construction. As we saw in the previous two sections, the broad currents of events lead, in some cases, to a general subjective experience of history, one which, while obviously not totalizing, maintains important threads through various economic, political, and social groups. When these subjective experiences come together to form a mythologized version of the past, they serve to focus individual experiences and intentions into a collective worldview and a collective intention, although not necessarily one shared universally amongst all people.
For both the revolution of 1857 and the Boxer rebellion, we can broadly consider the mythologies created both in terms of those created by the colonizers, and those created by the colonized. As one might imagine, the mythologies of these events tended to justify the actions of the colonizer, both within the context of the particular rebellion and also in the broader framework of colonial objectives in the region. So, subsequent to the revolution of 1857, the British came to mythologize the Indians as “ungrateful” for the “gift” of civilization. This mythology, in turn, served the double purpose of reinforcing the British’s commitment to their “civilizing” mission in India, and as a justification for those actions. The British also generated mythologies about themselves as a result of the events of 1857. The British soldiers who died in the course of the revolt became martyrs for the cause, stand-ins for the cultural onus of carrying the White Man’s Burden. As the numerous statues and other memorials scattered across the north of India attest, the British army was mythologized as the idealized heroes of colonialism, justified in their actions through this act of interpretation. There is, then, a reciprocal dynamic in which the actions of the imperial power formed the events which generate the mythology, which in turn justified those same actions. Mythology thus became a tool for maintaining the interests of the imperial, ruling class, generating a history favorable to those interests. For most colonial powers, the Boxer rebellion served much the same purpose. The American-made mythology surrounding the Boxer rebellion, however, is illuminating in its particulars.  Instead of justifying colonial intervention, the Boxer rebellion generated an intense fear of the Far East in America—the so called “Yellow Peril”—driving America deeper into isolationism and a rejection of Asian, and in particular Chinese, immigrants. Thus, the mythologizing of 1857 served to reinforce the dominant politics of America, even if that politic was not colonialism.
The colonized people, too, developed their own mythologies, which both constituted acts of resistance and also served as catalysts for future acts of resistance. The rebellion of 1857 was widely held up as an example of the possibility of producing resistance to British colonialism. Indeed, many of those same plaques put up by the British have been subsequently supplanted by ones dedicated to the Indian members of the revolt who died.  In this exchange of one memorial for another, the Indians replace the persons honored by remembrance, exchanging the British heroes for native ones, privileging the experience of the Sepoy mutineers in the narrative of history. Where the Indian mythologies of 1857 differ is in their location of violence within the rebellion. For some, the violence of the revolution became a problematic aspect that clashed with their politics of resistance. For others, that same violence was the defining characteristic of the revolution, and accordingly their mythologies privileged that violence. The role of violence within the Sepoy revolt thus serves as a good example of the ways in which myths, collectively, are often far from universally held, and often controversial.
The myths that the Chinese enacted about the Boxer rebellion were somewhat more varied, reflecting a changing relationship with the past. Central to their initial attempts at creating a mythology about the Boxer rebellion was establishing the place of traditionalism within the rebellion. Some intellectuals located the Boxer rebellion as a peasant revolt, reactionary in its goals, and sought to distance themselves from it. For others, the rebellion presented an opportunity to fight back against the encroaching European powers. Nonetheless, it was necessary for intellectuals to distance themselves from the peasants in order to not associate themselves with the perceived backwardness of that class. More interestingly, though, the Communist Party would move the Boxer Rebellion to a very central location in their own mythology. The Boxers were presented as a righteously anti-colonial movement, one which preceded the Party’s own desire to disentangle their country from the Western powers. They thus generated a mythology about the Boxers which was favorable to their policies at the time, depicting the Boxers as driving out the evil Westerners—a precursor to the modern proletariat—and finally as a “progressive” force, in the mold in which the Communist Party sought to cast itself. Communist narratives and depictions of the Boxers thus tended to focus on them driving out the Westerners or otherwise assaulting the trappings of Western-ness. It also stamped out any of the class hostilities that might have previously tainted mythologies of the Boxers, ensuring that their class position as the precursor to the proletariat was viewed positively.  Finally, the Communists intentionally brought to light and emphasized the role of “progressive” institutions within the Boxers, notably the Red Lanterns, which often in reality had a fairly insignificant role.  The Communist mythologizing of the Boxers also signaled the end of the divergent opinions on the Rebellion that had previously been generated by independent intellectuals.  Recognizing the power of cultural recollection, the Chinese government sought to bring all mythology about the Boxers in line with their own, controlling the discourse surrounding their history, and strongly politicizing the stories they told about the past.
In order to understand the direction in which discourses on history have taken, it is necessary to investigate the ways in which that history has been reformulated in to myth. The three keys of history, when played together harmoniously, create a chord which illuminates history for us. First, events happen. This event is then experienced in a completely subjective way by the people who live through it, pursuant to the individual circumstances and life experiences of those individuals. Then, since the subjective experience of a historical event remains inaccessible for those who did not experience it (and different experiences are inaccessible for different people), it becomes necessary to generate common beliefs about what it is that history means. Explicitly, people need a narrative structure to understand the ways in which the past informs the present. These form the individual myths that people spin about their own lives and the events they see around them. These collected narratives, directed towards some (often political) end, then grow to become myth.
The specific mechanisms by which colonialism was deployed in India by the British were a direct result of their economic interests in general, and of the need to spread and reinforce colonial systems in particular. This is not to deny other goals towards which colonialism was influenced, and the resulting myriad ways in which it influenced people’s lives it is simply to note that such an economic analysis can be quite productive for understanding why the mechanisms of colonialism developed in the ways that they did. Economic analysis of colonialism form a crucial part, then of any comprehensive analysis of colonial systems The first and primary goal of colonialism in India as it pertains to the development of capitalism was the incubation of a native capitalist market within India. This had as its most obvious goal the creation of sources of raw capital for improvement and new markets for exploitation, and was predicated on the development of a landless proletariat within India. The British worked to create this proletariat via both the reshaping of native economic and social structures within India, and the importation of instruments that the British had found effective at home. As a result of these enterprises, the British gained not only new markets and sources of raw goods, but also new tools for the control of the masses, both ones indigenous to India and ones that they developed as a result of their colonial mission there. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the development of India as a focal colony of sorts corresponded to the development of the global capitalist system which characterizes and supports modern capitalism. The structures of colonialism within India are, therefore, directly predicated on the needs of capitalism, and oriented towards its protection and expansion. 
	The colonial system that the British built in India was constructed with the proximate goal of establishing India as part of the larger, international capitalist system that Britain was in the process of constructing around the globe. For example, the establishment of new systems of agriculture within India served specifically to bring about the preconditions for capitalism. Molding Indian agricultural systems to match those of the British served a dual purpose in this regard. On the one hand, this initiative helped to establish India’s present as congruent with Britain’s past. In this way, it helped to constitute the justification for British colonial rule over India.  By thus situating India in history as “underdeveloped,” they created a narrative which centered themselves as heroes coming to the aid of the poor savages. On the other hand, it helped established the preconditions necessary for capitalism to take root. This is not to suggest that India’s history had to follow a strict path from slave society to feudal society and so on, but rather to note that the generation of the proletariat from the lower class of India necessitated, or at least was greatly helped, by the generation of a landless lower class, which the imposition of European-style agricultural systems helped bring about. The generation of this proletariat then furthered the ultimate goal of Britain and capitalism itself—establishing India as a capitalist market open and ready for exploitation. So while it is not true that there is some sort of inevitable, linear process of development that India had to follow, it is true that the British colonial involvement pushed them towards a certain historically oriented track, centered around specified economic modes, which they had found conducive to the development of capitalism. In fact, one can go further and note that the ways in which Britain attempted to create capitalism are a product of their own experiences with the development of capitalism in Britain: the creation of a landless pool of labor to work in the factories was a critical step in the development of British capitalism, and so they tried to recreate it in India, although the actual deployment of factories in India would not come until later. They thus generated a working class in India, one capable of fueling the fires of capitalism both there and abroad—the British frequently exported labor from India to other colonies, in particular plantations and elsewhere in southeast Asia.  By recreating their own pattern of development in India, the British brought to bear the lessons they had learned in the deployment of capitalism and justified their control over India.
	British attempts to create a landless proletariat went hand in hand with their fascination with the caste system of India. Class had been extremely important in Britain even in the run up to the development of capitalism, and class markers only increased in importance with the development of the proletariat and the bourgeois. The existing caste system in India, then, provided a handy framework for the development of a specific class system in India, and hence the establishment of capitalism. Of course, caste is certainly not equivalent or even analogous to class, but it did appeal to the British as a useful framework on which to develop one, in much the same way as they did with India agriculture. Such a framework had the benefit, from the British perspective, of being on the whole culturally accessible to the Indians. The British obsession with controlling and regulating India culture, then, comes to have the additional benefit of enabling them to sanction particular cultural modes that are conducive to their interests, including their project of developing a class framework for capitalism. Any consideration of caste and class of course raises the question of how the British envisaged the development of a native bourgeois within India. Here the picture is much more complicated than with the proletariat and a full consideration is beyond the scope of this essay. However, suffice it to say that the British position here was more ambivalent and, indeed, marked most strongly by internal dissention . To the extent that there was consensus, however, it was that the “natural elite” of India should be educated along the lines of bourgeois values, and should have some control over the proletariat, at least to the extent of levying taxes from them. Beyond this, the defining characteristic of the development of a bourgeois within India was its divisiveness within the British aristocracy. Still, in general the British attempted to apply lessons they had learned at home about the development of capitalism to India in their attempt to develop a class structure that was both familiar and, to their minds, essential.
	Additionally, though, British colonial involvement in India provoked them to develop new instruments for the deployment of capitalism in the home theatre. The arrival of “scientific” racism and social Darwinism within this period was predicated, largely, on the need to develop effective tools to control large, subservient populations in colonial territories. These same tools, with some modifications, were deployed for the control of populations at home. Most directly, they were useful in the control of internally colonized peoples in Britain, in particular the Irish. More importantly, though, these tools became powerful weapons in the maintenance of the proletariat. Social Darwinism, developed hand in hand with ideas on the inferiority of indigenous peoples, came to justify within the context of the capitalist system the oppression of the proletariat. Racism, too, functioned to solidify the position of the white proletariat in the capitalist system. Whatever the lot of the white proletariat, they were at least not of an “inferior” race. These “Wages of Whiteness,” as Roediger described them , helped the white laborer separate himself from the non-white worker, defining himself in relation to, specifically above, the non-white laborer. These wages were a direct product of the racism developed in the colonial sphere and were, additionally, an essential weapon of the divide-and-conquer strategies that the British developed in the colonies. Simply put, if one puts the white and non-white workers in opposition to each other, they will not cooperate in rebellion against the capitalist system. This works especially well if you further favor the white laborers relative to the non-white workers, so that their relative well being is tied to the well being of capitalism, and some of the non-white workers are implicitly given the possibility of eventually becoming white. We see, then, that not only did the British export their methods for developing and maintaining the capitalist system to India and their other colonies, but they also imported methods from those countries which they developed in the course of colonizing these countries. 
	Finally, the development of widely dispersed colonies directly assisted in the creation of an international economy which formed the basis for modern global capitalist systems. Capital self-valorizes, and this itself provides sufficient motivation for the geographical expansion of the capitalist system. Moreover, the expansion of capitalism to every corner of the earth solidifies its position as the dominant global economic—and hence cultural—system. Anything short of global hegemony threatens capitalism on a fundamental, systemic level. Its expansion to every corner of the world via colonialism is useful for capitalism, then, not just because it opens new markets and furthers the valorization of capital, but also because it secures capitalism wherever it is already established from the threats of alternative economic modes. By thus restricting the realm of possible economic systems, the growth of capitalism helps alleviate the risk of economic revolution at home, helping to restrain the alternatives imaginable by the proletariat and those sympathetic to their cause. Such an analysis, however, requires a somewhat more complicated view of the power relations between Britain, India, and her other colonies than is typical. In order to generate this global economy, India needed not just to be passively “capitalized,” but in fact to become a regional locus of power, at least in relation to the other colonies. As Metcalf astutely notes, it is not coincidental that the height of turn-of-the-century globalization coincided with the apex of India’s influence within the colonial system.  “To the contrary,” he says, “the globalizing economy and India’s predominance in the Indian Ocean region were mutually constitutive.”  The growth of one enforced the other; the centering of India fueling the growth of global capital, and India growing in prominence as a result of this new system. In the development of globalization, then, one is presented with an excellent example of the interplay between capitalism and colonialism, how the growth of the former fostered the development of the latter.	
	British Colonialism marched in lockstep with British capitalism. Capitalism became both the tool and the end of Colonialism, helping to subjugate the colonized peoples while also being one of the primary benefactors of this new colonial system. The creating of these new, interconnected systems required the molding of existing social structures and classes into forms amenable to the foundations of these institutions. Thus, to be a British colonial subject was the become part of a global capitalist system, to find one’s own cultural and economic life molded by colonialism in ways favorable to capitalism. For a British citizen too, though, the artifacts of colonialism and imperialism served to reinforce their new position as a member of the capitalist system. The resituating of peoples in ways conducive to the development of capitalism was accomplished using various mechanisms developed by colonialism, as well as old tools forged at home, in the creation of the domestic proletariat. This dynamic was deployed again and again, not just in India but wherever colonial interests were held. Colonialism and capitalism, then, may be seen as two aspects of one initiative, a totalizing economic and cultural mission bent on global hegemony.
The deployment of colonialism in India in the particular ways that it was deployed by the British was a direct result of their economic interests in general, and of the need to spread and reinforce colonial systems in particular. This is not to deny other goals towards which colonialism was influenced, and the resulting myriad ways in which it influenced people’s lives. It is simply to note that such an economic analysis can be quite productive for understanding why the mechanisms of colonialism developed in the ways that they did. The first and primary goal of colonialism in India as it pertains to the development of capitalism was the incubation of a native capitalist market within India. This had as its most obvious goal the creation of sources of raw capital for improvement and new markets for exploitation, and was predicated on the development of a landless proletariat within India. The British worked to create this proletariat via both the reshaping of native economic and social structures within India, and the importation of instruments that the British had found effective at home. As a result of these enterprises, the British gained not only new markets and sources of raw good, but also new tools for the control of the masses, both ones indigenous to India and ones that they developed as a result of their colonial mission there. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the development of India as a focal colony of sorts went hand in hand  with the development of the global capitalist system which characterizes and supports modern capitalism. The structures of colonialism within India are, therefore, directly predicated on the needs of capitalism, and oriented towards its protection and expansion. 
	The colonial system that the British built in India was constructed with the immediate desire of establishing India as part of the capitalist system that Britain was building. For example, the establishment of new systems of agriculture within India served to bring about the preconditions for capitalism. Molding Indian agricultural systems to match those of the British served a dual purpose in this regard. On the one hand, this helped to establish India’s present as congruent with Britain’s past. In this role, it helped to constitute the justification for British colonial rule over India CITE. By thus situating India in history as “underdeveloped,” the British paved the way to view themselves as helpers. On the other, it helped established the preconditions necessary for Capitalism to take root. This isn’t to suggest that India’s history had to follow strict path, from slave society, to feudal and on, but rather to note that the generation of the proletariat from the lower class of India necessitated, or at least was greatly helped by, the generation of a landless lower class, which the imposition of European style agricultural systems helped do. The generation of this proletariat then furthered the ultimate British and capitalist goal of establishing India as a capitalist market ready for exploitation. So while it is not true that there is some sort of inevitable track of development that India had to follow, it is true that the British colonial involvement pushed them towards a certain historically oriented track, centered around certain economic modes, which they had found conducive to the development of capitalism. In fact, one can go further, and note that the ways in which Britain attempted to capitalize are a product of the British’s own experiences with the development of capitalism in Britain; the freeing of the labor pool to work in factories was a critical step in the development of British capitalism, and so they tried to apply it in India. They thus generated a working class in India, one capable of fueling the fires of capitalism both there and abroad—the British frequently exported labor from India to other colonies, in particular plantations and elsewhere in southeast Asia.  Concluding sentence?
	The British attempts to create a landless proletariat went hand in hand with their fascination with the caste system of India. Class had been extremely important in Britain even in the run up to the development of capitalism, and class markers only increased in importance with the development of the proletariat and the bourgeois. The existing caste system in India, then, provided a handy framework for the development of class, and hence the establishment of capitalism. Of course, caste is certainly not equivalent or even analogous to class, but it did appeal to the British as a useful framework on which to develop one, in accordance  with the way they did it with the farming. Such a framework had the benefit, from the British perspective, of being relatively culturally assessable to the Indians. The British obsession with controlling and regulating India culture, then, comes to have the additional benefit of enabling them to sanction particular cultural modes that are conducive to their interests, including their interests in developing some class. Any consideration of caste and class of course raises the question of how the British envisaged the development of a native bourgeois within India. Here the picture is much more complicated that with the proletariat and a full consideration is beyond the scope of this essay. However, suffice it to say that the British position here was more ambivalent and, indeed, marked most strongly by internal dissention CITE. To the extent that there was consensus, it was that the “natural elite” of India should be educated somewhat in-line with bourgeois values and should have some control over the proletariat, at least levying taxes from them. Beyond this, the defining characteristic of the development of a bourgeois within India was its divisiveness within the British aristocracy. Still, in general the British attempted to develop the class structure that they were familiar with and found conducive to the development of capitalism in India, applying the lessons they had learned at home about the development of capitalism to India.
	Additionally, though, British colonial involvement in India  lead them to the development of new instruments for the deployment of capitalism in the home theatre. The development of “scientific” racism and social Darwinism within the period was predicated, largely, on the need to develop tools to effectively control large, subservient populations in colonial territories. These same tools, with some modifications, became effective tools for the control of populations at home. Most directly, they were useful in the control of internally colonized peoples in Britain, in particular the Irish. More importantly, though, these tools became powerful weapons in the maintenance of the proletariat. Social Darwinism, developed hand in hand with ideas on the inferiority of indigenous peoples, came to justify within the context of the capitalist system the oppression of the proletariat. Racism, too, came to solidify the position of the white proletariat in the capitalist system. Whatever the lot of the white proletariat, they were at least not of an “inferior” race. These “Wages of Whiteness”, as Roediger described themCITE, helped the white laborer separate himself from the black  worker, defining himself in relation to, specifically above, the black laborer. These wages were a direct product of the racism developed in the colonial sphere and were, additionally, a product of the divide-and-conquer strategies that the British developed in the colonies. If you play the whites against the blacks, they won’t cooperate to destroy the capitalist system. We thus see that not only did the British export their methods for developing and maintaining the capitalist system to India and their other colonies, but they also imported methods from those countries which they developed in the course of colonial actions in these countries. 
	Finally, the development of widespread, international colonies directly assisted in the creation of a global economy which formed the basis for modern global capitalist systems. Capital self-valorizes, and this itself provides sufficient motivation for the geographical expansion of the capitalist system. Moreover, though, the expansion of capitalism to every corner of the earth solidifies its position as something. Anything short of global hegemony threatens capitalism anywhere it is. The expansion of capitalism to every corner of the world via colonialism is useful for capitalism, then, not just because it opens new markets and furthers the valorization of capital, but because it secures capitalism wherever it is already established from the threats of alternative economic modes. By thus restricting the realm of possible economic systems, the growth of capitalism helps alleviate the risk of economic revolution at home, helping to restrain the alternatives imaginable by the proletariat and those sympathetic to their cause. Such an analysis, however, requires a somewhat more complicated view of the power relations between Britain, India, and her other colonies than is typical. In order to most optimally generate this global economy, India needed not just to be passively “capitalized,” but also to become a regional locus of power, at least in relation to the other colonies. As Metcalf astutely notes, it is not coincidental that the height of turn of the century globalization coincided with the maximum of India’s influence within the colonial system.  “To the contrary,” he says, “the globalizing economy and India’s predominance in the Indian Ocean region were mutually constitutive.”  The growth of one enforced the other, the centering of India fueling the growth of global capital, and India growing in prominence as a result of this new system. In the development of globalization, then, one is presented with an excellent example of the interplay between capitalism and colonialism, how the growth of one fostered the development of the other.	
	British Colonialism went hand in hand with British Capitalism. Capitalism became both the tool and the end of Colonialism, helping to subjugate the colonial peoples while also being one of the primary benefactors of this new colonial system. The creating of these new, interconnected systems required the molding of existing social structures and classes into ones amenable to the foundations of these institutions. Thus to be a British colonial subject was the become part of a global capitalist system, to find one’s own cultural and economic life molded by colonialism in ways favorable to capitalism. For a British citizen too, though, the artifacts of colonialism and imperialism served to reinforce their new position as a member of the capitalist system. The resituating of peoples in ways conducive to the development of capitalism was accomplished using various systems and tools developed by colonialism, as well as old tools forged at home, in the creation of the domestic proletariat. This led to not only the development of capitalism in India, but also in the rest of the world which was good for capitalism. 
Fanon is fascinated with the role that violence plays in colonization. He is fascinated by the intrinsic role of violence in the creation of the materiel colonial system. He is fascinated by the ways in which the violence of colonization impact the colonized individual. Most radically, though, he is fascinated by the ways in which violence can be used as a tool of the oppressed to enact decolonization. More traditionally, he examines the ways in which violence can be used to overthrow those official structure of colonization which enact violence upon the colonized. In his most radical musings, however, he examines how the individual who is colonized may use violence against the colonizer as a will to power in order to decolonize and re-colonize him/herself. For Fanon, the violence of colonialism manifests itself with respect to the individual primarily in its dehumanization or Othering of him or her. Indeed, this Othering of the native population is the primary goal of the brutality of colonialism, both in its sedating of the colonized, and in the enabling of the barbarism of the colonizer. While Fanon’s theories on the use of violence are brilliant and certainly worthy of examination, Fanon is unable to develop his view of violence into anything more than a temporary stop gap to the gapping whole in humanity created by the colonial system. This is not to say his ideas should be discarded out of hand—his understanding of the psyche of the colonized is unparalleled, and his views on the usefulness of violence cannot be simply dismissed. Rather, in critiquing Fanon, we can gain a deeper understanding of the role of violence within the colonial system, both as a means of oppression, and as a path to salvation.
	For Fanon, the role of violence within the colonial system is primarily to dehumanize or Other the colonized individual. Fanon is, of course, very conscious of the practical benefits of violence for the colonial system in the direct repression of the colonized people. He is, however, more interested in the more theoretical effects violence has on the colonized. Its primary effect, in his opinion, is to Other the colonized. By Other, Fanon means that the colonized individual is made into something separate and distinct the colonists. In the most extreme cases, the colonized individual is reduced to the state of an animal, incapable, in the eyes of the ruling powers, of rational thought or understanding the reasoning word, but only the cruelty of the whip.  Further, the colonized is made constantly aware of their status as Other by the ever present fear of senseless violence from the state.  Hand in hand with the Othering of the individual, Fanon sees the colonial system as one which compartmentalizes, which divides in what is ultimately an arbitrary manner one group of humans from another.  In this way the colonizing individual does not owe the colonized people fealty, does not owe them justice, does not owe them brotherhood because they are not his brothers—they are fundamentally Other to the colonizer, both as individuals and as a group as a whole. This dehumanizing of the colonized both as individuals and as a group is necessary for the barbarism of colonialism to exist. One can see as much in the basic training of soldiers; it is necessary to the break down the fighting men’s conception of their enemy as people so that the soldier may kill his enemy without sympathy. Hence colonialism begins, as Fanon stresses over and over, at bayonet point, enacted by soldiers who are already view their enemy as inhuman. Initially, the civilian colonizers are incapable of enact the necessary violence upon the native people. It is violence which the armed forces enact upon the native population, however, which dehumanizes them in the eyes of all the colonists, thus allowing the civilian population to carry on the task of keeping the colonized in line. For Fanon, violence within the colonial system is at once enabled by the dehumanization of the native peoples, and enacts that Othering via the inherently dehumanizing process of violence.
	While violence serves as the tool of the colonizer both at a practical level, by the direct repression of the colonized people, and at a theoretical level, via the Othering of the colonized individual, Fanon believes violence also holds the key to the destruction of the colonial system, again on both a practical and theoretical level. At the practical level, Fanon believe that violence is an integral part of the destruction of the systems of colonization. These systems, Fanon argues, have been specifically designed to resist non-violent action.  While they have, of course, also been built to withstand violence overthrow, a sufficient amount of violence will work to destroy the colonial systems, whereas for Fanon the passivity inherent in his vision of non-violence dooms such methods to be ineffectual at best, and as counter-productive at worst. Non-violence, in Fanon’s mind, implicitly accepts the status quo in its passiveness, and thus strengthens the hand of the colonialist to the detriment of the native people. Only violence, as the dialectical opposite of non-violence is capable of taking the initiative to force change in the colonial system, an initiative without which the system will not fall. Finally, the colonial is, in the eyes of the colonizer, little better than an animal. As such, Fanon argues, the colonized should not expect the colonizer to accept any rational arguments from the colonized, no more than the lamb led to slaughter should expect mercy. Rather, the colonizer only understands the colonized when they lash out in the universal language of violence. An aggressive, bloody revolution is thus a pragmatic necessity in the destruction of the colonial system by the colonized peoples.
	Fanon’s reliance on violence is not merely practical, however—for him, violence serves as the balm which sooths the soul ravaged by colonialism. As discussed above, one of the primary effects of the violence of colonialism upon the individual is their Othering. As part of this Othering and dehumanizing of the colonized individual, they are stripped of their agency. They are restricted from exercising their will to power, in either a creative or destructive manner. The application of violence by the colonized individual thus acts as an affirmation of their will to power, and therefore by extension of their humanity, insofar as it violates the explicit aims of colonialism, namely the eradication of violence in the indigenous community. In addition to being self-affirming, this application of violence is also self-preserving. Humans, Fanon argues, have a natural tendency to be violent. This, combined with the restriction on the expression of anger and compounded by the frustrations and violence enacted upon the colonized individual leads to an untenable situation in which either the violence must out, or be turned in on the individual in self destruction. Violence against the oppressor, then, serves as a sort of pressure control valve, making sure that the violence is not directed inward on the individual. The individual engaged in violence against the colonizing powers is then also engaged in an act of self-decolonization. By enacting violence against the imperialist system and exerting their own will to power, the colonized individual is thus breaking down the mental barriers imposed on him by colonialism and reclaiming his personhood. From the decolonization of the individual, Fanon claims, violence spreads decolonization to the group as a whole, undoing the Othering of the colonized people and decompartmentalizing the colonial world.  In the same way, then, that the violence inherent in the colonial system infects the individual and from there the group, so too does the violence of decolonization first rehumanize the individual by freeing them of their psychic bonds and then freeing the whole community from the compartmentalization of colonialism. Violence serves not only an essential practical role in Fanon’s vision, but also serves the theoretical role of rebuilding the human broken down by
	While Fanon’s theories on the use of violence in colonial insurrection are a vital insight into both the mindset of the colonized and into the necessity of both anger and force in achieving decolonization, ultimately he relies too much on violence to solve the horrors faced by colonial countries. The most fundamental and theoretical problem with Fanon’s argument is in the inherently dehumanizing nature of violence. Fanon himself argues that any violence is inherently dehumanizing and Othering—this is why the colonial system itself is dehumanizing. Thus in using violence to rehumanize themselves, the colonial subjects must be dehumanizing some other person, and, at the level of the group, the imperialist powers are made into the Other. Thus while it is certainly possible that the people in power being Othered is preferable to the colonized being Othered, and while some progress might be made in decolonization, ultimately no fundamental progress is achieved. Man still hates his brother, woman still views her sister as inhuman, and mankind still wars needlessly. Compounding this danger, Fanon intentionally seeks to give this violence to those most capable of misusing it: the rural proletariat. Fanon himself admits their predilection for violence—indeed, it excites him.  Further, already prone to taking arms, the proletariat are less likely to keep their violence limited, as Fanon is counting on. Finally, once the colonialists have been removed, at least formally, from power, they are most likely to redirect violence inwards in the form of intra-national and sectarian fighting. With the unifying enemy of the colonial power removed, and being acclimated to the use of violence both as a practical means to solve problems and as a means of expressing their humanity, the proletariat naturally turns their violence destructively inwards in the form oftribal and religious fighting. We have the fortune of hindsight here; Fanon, writing before the powers of Europe left Africa, believed that since tribal differences were artificially induced by the colonial powers, the violence used in expulsion of said powers would lead to the end of such tribal conflict. Violence, he says, is “totalizing and nation…it harbors in its depths the elimination of regionalism and tribalism” (51). Regardless of who created those tensions, however, they remained. Long accustomed to using violence to solve their problems, the colonized have turned that violence inwards against their fellow colonized, much to the chagrin of the neo-colonialist. Long accustomed to bringing violence against the other, the proletariat refocused that violence on their own countrymen who, belonging to another tribe or religion or ethnic group, constituted the new Other. Thus while violence may indeed have a rehumanizing effect on the colonized, it also acclimates them to the use of violence against their fellow man in their attempts to achieve their goals.
	This all is not to say that Fanon has made no useful contributions to the theory or practicality of decolonization; quite the opposite. What is needed is not a rejection of Fanon, but rather a synthesis of his violent revolution with non-violent means of struggle. Fanon’s focus on the anger and violent instincts of repressed, colonized people is absolutely vital. To dismiss this anger as illegitimate or overstated would be both insulting and counter-productive. Anger is absolutely necessary for change, but it must be the righteous anger that flows down from on high to cleanse the world of injustice, not the burning fury that destroys all before it. Anger is the driving force behind fundamental societal change, anger at the injustices of the world. Accordingly, it must be an anger which seeks to right those wrongs for the improvement of society as a whole, not an anger which seeks only destruction. Fanon’s anger is too indiscriminate—it sweeps all before it, good and evil. He is right to criticize the non-violent movement where it is passive and calls for acceptance of the status quo. Change needs impetus, and it is most often the oppressed who must provide that impetus from the well-spring of their anger. That anger, however, needs to critique the system as is, which is to say, salvage what is good and fix what is bad. It cannot tear down all before it. Thus while violence may, as a strict practical necessity may need to be applied from time to time, it cannot become the backbone of the movement. If we thus allow violence to govern the decolonization process, we free our brothers from the chains of inequity only to lock them in the shackles of their worst instincts. What decolonization needs, then, is neither the brutality of Fanon’s philosophy nor the passivity of a completely non-violent solution—rather, it needs both the passion and active agitation of Fanon’s revolution and the long term stability and reconciliation of a non-violent approach. 
	Fanon’s theories of the psyche of the colonized and of the role of violence in the process of decolonization are an integral part of any plan of decolonization. He understands completely what the barbarous violence of colonialism does to the oppressed, and it is impossible to attempt decolonization without grasping these dehumanizing effects. He also challenges traditional notions of the role of violence in achieving lasting change and, in doing so, illuminates some of the weaknesses of a purely non-violent approach. In doing so, however, he sows the seeds for the perpetuation of violence in a post-colonial world. Any successful strategy for decolonization, therefore, must synthesize Fanon’s radical struggle and non-violent methods to be successful. 


Within the Liberal tradition, formal equality is one of the pillars upon which just and effective government is built. Thinkers from Locke to Rousseau have pinned their conception of what it means for government to be virtuous as stemming from formal equality. In On the Jewish Question, Marx attacks this fundamental tenant of the Liberal school of thought as being ultimately counterproductive. Rather than being a tool by which governments can ensure the equitable distribution of civil rights and liberties, formal equality rather becomes in Marx’s analysis a barrier erected between man as he exists as a social creature and the political realm through which he can achieve a status befitting his dignity as a human being. In other words, Marx would say that formal equality prevents mankind from achieving species being. However, Marx is not interested in merely tearing down a Liberal tradition of formal equality. Rather, he wishes to critique it, meaning that he wants to first understand its workings, and from there take what is good from it and create a new conception for the basis of government, one from which he can build a society capable of achieving its species being. The primary means by which Marx does this throughout On the Jewish Question is by identifying and resolving dialectics, in accordance with what I have argued in the past to be his conception of critique. Marx’s examination of Jewish rights serves as a springboard for a critique of Liberal notions of formal equality—and, by extension, of Liberal Capitalist government—through which he can arrive at a vision of a society capable of achieving species being.
	For Marx, formal equality within the Liberal capitalist system acts as an impediment to the achievement of species being because it separates man into two beings: one, the egotistical man of the political realm, and the other, the actual moral citizen.  Man, within the Liberal tradition, has been inherently molded by formal equality. Any inherent or economic inequalities he had possessed are stripped away—or, at least, are superseded by—the formal equality of all men before the law. This attitude was, in large part, a reaction to the condition of man under feudalism. There, the rights, responsibilities, and in general the standing of a man before the law or state was based to a large degree on his social status. The social relations between men had ossified into formal political relations.  Thus if you were a banker, that was not just how you made your living, but also to a large degree who you were in the eyes of the law. Formal equality, then, emerged as a reaction to Feudalism, separating man as an individual from his political self. The unjust division of man within Feudalism would then be destroyed and hopefully averted in the future. So, whereas in Feudalism the actual and political man are bound together into one person—while some are excluded from the political realm entirely—in the Liberal tradition, all were, at least in theory, included in the political system. However, this can only be accomplished at the expense of separating the political individual from the real moral citizen.  Explicitly, the modern Capitalist system is thus the exact antithesis of the Feudalistic system. This, then, is the central dialectic with which Marx will engage in On the Jewish Question, a dialectic whose resolution is inherently and intimately tied to the formal equality present in the modern Liberal tradition.
	As I have argued in a previous paper, Marx’s primary form of critique is to discover, engage with, and hopefully resolve, dialectics present within the materiel, in accordance with his conception of history. In fact, in On the Jewish Question, Marx comes close to directly referencing the dialectic directly; the riddle to which he refers on page 55 is closely related to the dialectic introduced by formal equality with which he will ultimately grapple, that of the interplay between political society and civil life. On a larger scale, however, the dialectic which Marx attempts to resolve is one between the Feudalistic and Capitalistic societies. As already discussed, Feudalism’s unification of social and political life but exclusion of certain individuals opposes Capitalism’s separation and inclusion. Both of the characteristics of the Capitalist system are due to formal equality; it is formal equality which deliberately draws a line between the actual individual and the political man and, in doing so, allows all to be included in political life. In a sense, then, formal equality constitutes the alienation of an individual’s political power from the actual person as they stand in relation to society and their materiel conditions to their egoistic political self, and in parallel, from the real individual as he stands in relation to his materiel conditions to the abstract individual of political theory. In other words, the individual is given political power under the explicit condition that it only be exercised for them as a self-centered individual and not with respect to the community as a whole.  This is the core of the problem for Marx, for it is only when all have political power that man can achieve species being; yet it is not the theoretical individual of political science who achieves species being, but rather the actual individual, affected by his materiel conditions and integrated into, and working for, civil society who reaches this desired state of being.  For Marx, social forces are inherently political forces and vice-versa ; formal equality, by separating the two, inherently works against mankind achieving species being. Critiquing formal equality thus becomes a practical way to resolve the dialectic between the Feudalistic and Capitalistic worlds. In order to resolve this larger dialectic, however, Marx must focus his attention on the dialectic wrought in individuals by formal equality.
	Within the Capitalist system, according to Marx, formal equality separates man as he is actually is from the theoretical political man. In doing so, a dialectic is formed in each man, one closely related to and mirroring that between the Capitalist and Feudalistic systems. For egoistic man is permitted into the sphere of politics only insofar as he divorces himself in this role from the actual man, embedded in a real social existence.  Political man, as a being within in the Liberal tradition, is thus unable to contribute fully to the progress of mankind as a whole, divorced as he is from his fellow man. The individual, real, man, however, is denied his political power by formal equality, as this power is alienated to his egoistic self. The political man is thus the antithesis of the real man within the Liberal tradition. Moreover, it is only in the resolution of this dialectic within the individual man that the larger dialectic can be resolved, for the effects of formal inequality are felt acutely in each individual man, and it is only through its action on individuals that formal equality exerts its influence on society as a whole. This is, incidentally, essentially Marx’s criticism of Jewish cries for emancipation which prompted the writing of On the Jewish Question. According to Marx merely granting political rights to the Jewish people ignores the larger complex of issues generated by formal equality, and, moreover, exacerbates them, as it reinforces the divide between the actual and the political individual. For Marx, the achievement of species being cannot come about in this manner, but only by the resolution of the divide between the political and real individual, and hence the resolution of the dialectic between the Capitalistic and Feudalistic systems. 
	It is thus within the individual that Marx must first resolve the dialectic so that the individuals collectively may effect the changes in society as a whole that are Marx’s ultimate goal. Political emancipation, via formal equality, has separated man into his political self and the actual, moral citizen. Since this separation has induced the dialectic within each individual man, it is only by closing this gap that the dialectic may be resolved in each person, a process Marx dubs ‘human emancipation’. As he explicitly says, “the actual individual man must take the abstract citizen back into himself…becom[ing] a species-being…[he must] no longer separate social forces from himself in the form of political forces” (Marx, 57). In doing so, the individual commits an act of revolution, resolving within himself the dialectic which Marx has identified within society as a whole. The real, social individual, now aware of and actively using his political power for the good of mankind as a whole, has resolved the dialectic, being possessed now of both the species consciousness and the political power necessary for man to achieve species being. Once each individual person has achieved this individual species being, it will be possible, and, indeed, inevitable, that mankind as a whole will achieve its collective species being.
	The notion of formal equality has long been a staple of the Liberal tradition. It is only with the equality of all people before the law, the Liberal tradition claims,that government can be effective and just. For Marx, just the opposite is true. Formal equality, instead of freeing humans to achieve species being, rather acts to prevent them for achieving it. However, they way in which it does so is exactly the opposite as the way in which this is prevented under Feudalism. Rather than the political and real man being united, but denied political power, as in Feudalism, each individual is given political power, but their political selves are separated from the true persons. The Feudalistic and Capitalistic systems thus form a dialectic, with formal equality serving as the functional form of that dialectic. Further, because formal equality acts directly on the individual, it is within each person that Marx must resolve this dialectic. Thus it is only when each person has completed this act of individual revolution that the dialectic between Feudalism and Capitalism may be resolved, and mankind may achieve species being.
For both Locke and Hobbes, the state of nature, and man’s condition within it, forms the basis for the reasoning they will employ in their works, Second Treatise of Government and Leviathan, respectively. Both thinkers begin with an analysis of the conditions found within the state of nature, and from there deduce what the best form of government is from the perspective of a rational, largely self-interested individual. Thus differences in their conceptions of the state of nature lead to differing conceptions of the role of government, explicitly because of that central argumentative role played by the state of nature. The state of nature is thus somewhat analogous to an axiomatic basis for their logical investigations, although this comparison can only carry us so far, as both work to justify their view of the state of nature, instead of simply taking it for granted. From their visions of the state of nature, both authors proceed naturally to a discussion of man within that context as a rational, generally self-interested being. From here their differing conceptions of the state of nature lead them to regard man as having inherently different innate characteristics. It is ultimately these differences in the nature of man, and thus in the state of nature, that motivate their differing conceptions of the role of, and limitations upon, government. For in both authors’ conceptions, the government’s role is to remedy—or, at least, safeguard against—the deficiencies of man, and thus their differing views of the nature of man lead inexorably to differing visions of both the scope of, and limitations on, government. Both Locke and Hobbes, then, begin their philosophical inquiries by analyzing the state of nature, for in both authors’ conceptions, the state of nature forms the argumentative basis for the system of government, as government is enacted via man’s rational self-interest in reaction to it. Hence differences in their respective analyses lead to differing visions for the form and role of government.
	For both Locke and Hobbes, analysis of the state of nature forms the bedrock on which they will build their edifice of government. More explicitly, the state of nature acts as the axiom from which each author will infer in a logical manner what forms of government are best. This is most obvious in Hobbes, whose Leviathan is explicitly patterned off geometrical proofs, in which conclusions are derived logically from facts which are assume to be valid. And, indeed, The Leviathan begins with a consideration of man as he is in a state of nature, and of this state of nature itself. In his considerations, Hobbes finds man to be an inherently rational being in that he can, with some degree of accuracy, foresee the consequences of an action, and shape his will accordingly. He can thus voluntarily act in a manner that will help him enact his will. Further, due to the natural equality of man, the state of nature is one of constant warfare, abhorrent to all men. Since, as Hobbes will show, man desires to remove himself from this state, the common-wealth is then a logical outgrowth of the state of nature. Its formation serves to “[get mankind] out from that miserable condition of Warre” (Leviathan 223) in which he finds himself in the state of nature.  The common-wealth does so by “tye[ing] [mankind] by feare of punishment to the…observation of [the] Lawes of Nature” (223), which are themselves dictated by the state of nature. For it is “because [of] the condition of Man” (189) that “every man has a Right to every thing” (190), and thus that “every man ought to endeavor Peace” (190) in reaction to said right. It is the endeavor for peace which constitutes the First Law of Nature. The subsequent laws are derived from this and from further considerations of the state of nature, in much the same way that a geometer may use one theorem to prove another. In Hobbes’ argument, the state of nature forms the motivation for the creation of the common-wealth, and its features shapes the bounds and role of government.
	Locke, too, treats the state of nature as the axiomatic beginning of political theory, from which he will build his conception of government and civil society. Although Locke’s vision of the state of nature is not nearly as bleak as Hobbes’, again it is the pitfalls of living in the state of nature which motivate the creation of the common-wealth. It is ultimately the desire to “[preserve] their lives, liberties, and estates” (Second Treaties of Government, 66) which drives people to band together into civil society. For the state of nature is lacking in security, wherefore one may take advantage of the various shortfalls inherent to the state of nature, such as the lack of established law. So while the state of nature may be, in general, a peaceable, cooperative situation, the existence of a few transgressors is enough to necessitate the creation of the common-wealth for Locke. However, since man is capable of cooperation within the state of nature, as well as the accumulation of property, the formation of government cannot be solely for the sake of the protection of his life, as it is with Hobbes. Rather, Lock states that the government must ensure the preservation of the liberties and property of its citizens. This conception of limited government, then, is rooted in Locke’s fundamental ambiguity towards the state of nature; because humans are not perfect, government is necessary to restrain them, but because the state of nature is not a miserable state of war, as in Hobbes’ conception, government power must be more greatly restrained. Further, it is this fundamental ambiguity that allows the citizenry to modify the restrictions on government, for in the absence of an absolute judge, the only ones fit to determine whether the terms of the social contract are acceptable are those who entered into it in the first place. Thus it is by taking into account both the ambiguous state of nature and the rationality of man that Locke develops his political philosophy, and hence these form the motivation for the formation of civil society
Due to the foundational role that the state of nature plays in their arguments, these divergences in Hobbes’ and Locke’s conception of the state of nature lead to fundamental disagreements in their views of the role of, and limitations on, government and the common-wealth. Hobbes views the state of nature as that of constant striving with one’s neighbors, in which there is never even fleeting security of the body; life is, as he famously put it “nasty, brutish, and short” (Leviathan, 186). While Locke concedes that man can—and does—act with violence against his fellow man, he holds a more balanced view in which man generally favors cooperation and the mutual advancement of goals. Importantly, because in Locke’s view man is the possessor of his own labor, he may, acquire property in the state of nature.  Thus, whereas for Hobbes government exists merely to protect the lives of its citizens, Locke’s government also protects their property and liberties. For in both authors’ conceptions, the role of the common-wealth is to remedy those deficiencies of the state of nature which are worth sacrificing some liberty for. Thus both authors are fundamentally interested in legitimizing government as the voluntary product of rational human self-interest. Whereas Hobbes is traditionally seen as advocating for absolute governmental systems, in reality his conception of the role of government is limited by the extent to which it is in the enlightened self-interest of the citizen to consent to it. So while government has nearly arbitrary power over its subjects in Hobbes’ conception, if it should ever go against the fundamental right of the individual to protect his own life, the government’s power is then void. On a basic level, a government that fails to protect its people is no better—and, in fact, is worse—than the state of nature, and hence the people have a right to overthrow it. More importantly, though, government specifically cannot compel a citizen to kill himself. In fact, a citizen can never be deprived of the right to defend himself, even if it is the government that is trying to harm him. Here, then, we come up against a hard limit on the power of government, one rooted in a single, inalienable right whose protection and observance constitutes the condition on legitimacy of government. 
	Locke, too, circumscribes the government’s power of influence by identifying what its logical sphere of influence should be. Specifically, the government, particularly the legislature, should reflect the will of the people, because what the people desire, and hence what they will, is the public good. Thus the government may not to take a citizen’s private property, except in the special case that a majority of the citizenry votes in favor of certain taxation. In this instance, those who entered into the contract are deciding that the public good brought about by this specific curtailing of the right to private property outweighs the harm of losing that liberty, which is exactly the same motivation for entering into the contract in the first place. Hence the reasons for the limitations on government and the definition on its role are consistent; namely, to remedy the maladies of the state of nature. Locke’s other restrictions on government are similarly reasoned, and are in general dictated by the will of the people. In this respect Locke differs from Hobbes, in that he allows the people much greater control over establishing the limitations of their government. Yet the ultimate limitation on the government—that it should act in accordance with the will of the people—ultimately stems from the same motivation as Hobbes; that government should fill in the deficiencies of the state of nature, as measured by the people. The differences in Hobbes’ and Locke’s conceptions of government, then, is explicitly due to the similar argumentative role the state of nature plays in their arguments.
	For both Hobbes and Locke, an analysis of the state of nature and of man’s condition within it forms the basis for their reasoning. From there, they apply logic to determine what government should and should not be. This parallels the actual process, in the authors’ conceptions, wherein the pre-political state of nature is transformed, via the assumed rationality and self-interest of the citizens, into the common-wealth or civil society. Therefore, the state of nature both guides the authors’ reflections on political philosophy, and, as an imperfect condition occupied by individuals striving for perfection, it motivates the actual formation of civil society. Thus while both authors use the state of nature in a similar argumentative role in their works Leviathan and Second Treatise of Government, using it as the basis for their logical developments, they differ in their actual conception of the state of nature, and therefore in their conceptions of the ideal government.

