We shall soon see whether this conception 
affords us any gain in understanding or any advan- 
tage for purposes of description. We shall now 
look upon the mind of an individual as an unknown 
and unconscious id, upon whose surface rests the 
ego, developed from its nucleus the Pcpt-system. 
If we make an effort to conceive of this pictorially, 
we may add that the ego does not envelop the 
whole of the id, but only does so to the extent to 
which the system Pcpt forms its surface, more or 
less as the germinal layer rests upon the ovum. 
The ego is not sharply separated from the id ; its 
lower portion merges into it. 

( But the repressed merges into the id as well, 
and is simply a part of it. The repressed is only 
cut off sharply from the ego by the resistances of 
repression ; it can communicate with the ego 
through the id. We at once realize that almost all 
the delimitations we have been led into outlining 
by our study of pathology relate only to the 

^ Groddeck himself no doubt followed the example of Nietzsche, 
who habitually used this grammatical term for whatever in our 
nature is impersonal and, so to speak, subject to natural law. 

[For the German * Es which means literally * it *, the corre- 
sponding Latin word ‘ id ’ has been adopted on the analogy of 
* ego * which is the accepted rendering of the German ' Ich * 
(literally ‘ I ’). — Trans.] 



  2g 

superficial levels of the mental apparatus — the only 
ones known to us. The state of things which we 
have been describing can be represented diagram- 
matically (Fig. i) ; though it must be remarked 
that the form chosen has no pretensions to any 
special applicability, but is merely intended to 
serve for purposes of exposition. We might add. 


Pcpt-Cs 



perhaps, that the ego wears an auditory lobe — on 
one side only, as we learn from cerebral anatomy. 
It wears it crooked, as one might say. 

Z' It is easy to see that the ego is that part of the 
id which has been modified by the direct influence 
of the external world acting through the Pcpt-Cs : 
in a sense it is an extension of the surface-differ- 
entiation. Moreover, the ego has the task of 



30   

bringing the influence of the external world to 
bear upon the id and its tendencies, and endeavours 
to substitute the reality-principle for the pleasure- 
principle which reigns supreme in the id. In the 
ego perception plays the part which in the id 
f devolves upon instinct. The ego represents what 
we call reason and sanity, in contrast to the id 
which contains the passions. All this falls into line 
with popular distinctions which we are all familiar 
with ; at the same time, however, it is only to be 
regarded as holding good in an average or ‘ ideal ’ 
case. 

y The functional importance of the ego is mani- 
fested in the fact that normally control over the 
approaches to motility devolves upon it. Thus in 
its relation to the id it is like a man on horseback, 
who has to hold in check the superior strength of 
the horse ; with this difference, that the rider 
seeks to do so with his own strength while the ego 
uses borrowed forces. The illustration may be 
carried further. Often a rider, if he is not to be 
parted from his horse, is obliged to guide it where 
it wants to go ; so in the same way the ego con- 
stantly carries into action the wishes of the id as if 
they were its own. 

It seems that another factor, besides the in- 
fluence of the system Pcpt, has been at work in 



  


31 


bringing about the formation of the ego and its 
differentiation from the id. The body itself, and 
above all its surface, is a place from which both 
external and internal perceptions may spring. It 
is seen in the same way as any other object, but to 
the touch it yields two kinds of sensations, one of 
which is equivalent to an internal perception. 
Psychophysiology has fully discussed the manner 
in which the body attains its special position among 
other objects in the world of perception. Pain 
seems also to play a part in the process, and the 
way in which we gain new knowledge of our organs 
during painful illnesses is perhaps a prototype of 
the way by which in general we arrive at the idea 
of our own body. 

The ego is first and foremost a body-ego ; it is 
not merely a surface entity, but it is itself the pro- 
jection of a surface.^ If we wish to find an 
anatomical analogy for it we can easily identify 
it with the ' cortical homunculus ' of the anatom- 
ists, which stands on its head in the cortex, sticks 
its heels into the air, faces backwards and, as we 
know, has its speech-area on the left-hand side. 

' [I.e. the ego is ultimately derived from bodily sensations, 
chiefly from those springing from the surface of the body. It 
may thus be regarded as a mental projection of the surface of 
the body, besides, as we have seen above, representing the 
superficies of the mental apparatus. — Authorized note by the 
Translator.] 



32   

The relation of the ego to consciousness has 
been gone into repeatedly ; yet there are still some 
important facts in this connection which remain to 
be described. Accustomed as we are to taking 
our social or ethical standard of values along with 
us wherever we go, we feel no surprise at hearing 
that the scene of the activities of the lower passions 
is in the imconscious ; we expect, moreover, that 
the higher any mental function ranks in our scale 
of values the more easily it will find access to con- 
sciousness assured to it. Here, however, psycho- 
anal5rtic experience disappoints us. On the one 
hand, we have evidence that even subtle and 
intricate intellectual operations which ordinarily 
require strenuous concentration can equally be 
carried out preconsciously and without coming into 
consciousness. Instances of this are quite incon- 
testable ; they may occur, for instance, during 
sleep, as is shown when some one finds, immedi- 
ately after waking, that he knows the solution of a 
difficult mathematical or other problem with which 
he had been wrestling in vain the day before.* 

There is another phenomenon, however, which 
is far stranger. In our analyses we discover that 
there are people in whom the faculties of self- 

^ I was quite recently told an instance of this which was, in 
fact, brought up as an objection against my description of the 
* dream- work *. 



  33 

criticism and conscience — mental activities, that 
is, that rank as exceptionally high ones — are un- 
conscious and unconsciously produce effects of the 
greatest importance ; the example of resistances 
remaining unconscious during analysis is therefore 
by no means unique. But this new discovery, 
which compels us, in spite of our critical faculties, 
to speak of an ' unconscious sense of guilt \ be- 
wilders us far more than the other and sets us 
fresh problems, especially when we gradually come 
to see that in a great number of neuroses this 
unconscious sense of guilt plays a decisive economic 
part and puts the most powerful obstacles in 
the way of recovery. If we come back once more 
to our scale of values, we shall have to say that 
not only what is lowest but also what is highest in 
the ego can be unconscious. It is as if we were 
thus supplied with a proof of what we have just 
asserted of the conscious ego : that it is first and 
foremost a body-ego. 



Ill 

THE EGO AND THE SUPER-EGO 
(EGO-IDEAL) 

I F the ego were merely the part of the id that 
is modified by the influence of the perceptual 
system, the representative in the mind of the 
real external world, we should have a simple state 
of things to deal with. But there is a further 
complication. 

The considerations that led us to assume the 
existence of a differentiating grade within the ego, 
which may be called the ego-ideal or super-ego, 
have been set forth elsewhere.^ They still hold 
good.* The new proposition which must now be 

I ; an Introduction ’ {igi^)^jCpllected Papers, 
vol. iv. ; and Group Psychology and the Analysis of ~thel£g 6 \ 1921), 
London, 1922. 

• Except that I seem to have been mistaken in ascribing the 
function of testing the reality of things to this super-ego — a point 
which needs correction. The view that the testing of reality is 
rather one of the functions of the ego itself would fit in j>erfectly 
with what we know of the relations of the ego to the world of 
perception. Some earlier suggestions about a ‘ nucleus of the 
ego never very definitely formulated, also require to be put 


34 



THE EGO AND THE SUPER-EGO (EGO-IDEAL) 35 

gone into is that this part of the ego is less closely 
connected with consciousness than the rest. 

At this point we must widen our range a little. 
We succeeded in explaining the painful disorder of 
melancholia by supposing that, in those suffering 
from it, an object which was lost has been re- 
instated within the ego ; that is, that an object- 
cathexis has been replaced by an identification.^ 
When this explanation was first proposed, how- 
ever, we did not appreciate the full significance of 
the process and did not know how common and how 
typical it is. Since then we have come to under- 
stand that this kind of substitution has a great 
share in determining the form taken on by the ego 
and that it contributes materially towards building 
up what is called its ‘ character \ 

At the very beginning, in the primitive oral 
phase of the individuars existence, object-cathexis 
and identification are hardly to be distinguished 
from each other. We can only suppose that later 
on object-cathexes proceed from the id, in which 
erotic trends are felt as needs. The ego, which at 
its inception is still far from robust, becomes aware 
of the object-cathexes, and either acquiesces in 


right, since the system Pcpt-Cs alone can be regarded as the 
nucleus of the ego. 

^ ‘ Mourning and Melancholia ' (1917), Collected Papers, vol. iv. 



  


36 

them or tries to defend itself against them by the 
process of repression.^ 

When it happens that a person has to give up 
a sexual object, there quite often ensues a modifi- 
cation in his ego which can only be described as a 
reinstatement of the object within the ego, as it 
occurs in melancholia ; the exact nature of this 
substitution is as yet unknown to us. It may be 
that, by undertaking this introjection, which is a 
kind of regression to the mechanism of the oral 
phase, the ego makes it easier for an object to be 
given up or renders that process possible. It may 
even be that this identification is the sole condition 
under which the id can give up its objects. At 
any rate the process, especially in the early phases 
of development, is a very frequent one, and it 
points to the conclusion that the character of the 
ego is a precipitate of abandoned object-cathexes 
and that it contains a record of past object-choices. 
It must, of course, be admitted from the outset 

' An interesting parallel to the replacement of object-choice 
by identification is to be found in the belief of primitive peoples, 
and in the taboos based upon it, that the attributes of animals 
which are assimilated as nourishment survive as part of the 
character of the persons who eat them. As is well known, this 
belief is one of the roots of cannibalism and its effects can be 
traced throughout the series of customs derived from the totem 
feast down to the Holy Communion. The consequences ascribed 
by this behef to oral mastery of the object do in fact follow in the 
case of the later sexual object-choice. 



THE EGO AND THE SUPER-EGO (EGO-IDEAL) 37 

that there are varying degrees of capacity for 
resistance, as shown by the extent to which the 
character of any particular person accepts or resists 
the influences of the erotic object-choices through 
which he has lived. In women who have had 
many love-affairs there seems to be no difficulty 
in finding vestiges of their object-cathexes in the 
traits of their character. We must also take into 
consideration the case of simultaneous object- 
cathexis and identification, i,e. in which the 
alteration in character occurs before the object has 
been given up. In such a case the alteration in 
character would be able to survive the object- 
relation and in a certain sense to conserve it. 

From another point of view it may be said that 
this transformation of an erotic object-choice into 
a modification of the ego is also a method by 
which the ego can obtain control over the id and 
deepen its relations with it — at the cost, it is true, 
of acquiescing to a large extent in the id's experi- 
ences. When the ego assumes the features of the 
object, it forces itself, so to speak, upon the id as 
a love-object and tries to make good the loss of 
that object by saying, ‘ Look, I am so like the object, 
you can as well love me '. 

The transformation of object-libido into nar- 
cissistic libido which thus takes place obviously 



38   

implies an abandonment of sexual aims, a process 
of desexualization ; it is consequently a kind of 
sublimation. Indeed, the question arises, and 
deserves careful consideration, whether this is not 
always the path taken in sublimation, whether aU 
sublimation does not take place through the agency 
of the ego, which begins by changing sexual object- 
libido into narcissistic libido and then, perhaps, 
goes on to give it another aim.^ We shall later on 
have to consider whether other instinctual vicissi- 
tudes may not also result from this transformation, 
whether, for instance, it may not bring about a 
defusion of the instincts that are fused together. 

Although it is a digression from our theme, we 
cannot avoid giving our attention for a moment 
longer to the ego’s object-identifications. If they 
obtain the upper hand and become too numerous, 
unduly intense and incompatible with one another, 
a pathological outcome wiU not be far off. It 
may come to a disruption of the ego in consequence 
of the individual identifications becoming cut off 
from one another by resistances ; perhaps the 
secret of the cases of so-called multiple personality 

^ Now that we have distinguished between  , 
we must recognize the id as the great reservoir of libido mentioned 
in my introductory paper on narcissism i^Qj^lkcped Papers, vol. iv.). 
The libido which flows into the ego owing to the identifications 
described above brings about its * secondary narcissism 



THE EGO AND THE SUPER-EGO (eGO-IDEAL) 39 

is that the various identifications seize possession 
of consciousness in turn. Even when things do 
not go so far as this, there remains the question 
of conflicts between the different identifications 
into which the ego is split up, conflicts which 
cannot after all be described as purely pathological. 

But, whatever the character’s capacity for resist- 
ing the influences of abandoned object-cathexes 
may turn out to be in after years, the effects of the 
first identifications in earliest childhood will be 
profound and lasting. This leads us back to the 
origin of the ego-ideal ; for behind the latter there 
lies hidden the first and most important identifica- 
tion of all, the identification with the father,* 
which takes place in the prehistory of every 
person. This is apparently not in the first instance 
the consequence or outcome of an object-cathexis ; 
it is a direct and immediate identification and 
takes place earlier than any object-cathexis. But 


* Perhaps it would be safer to say ‘ with the parents ’ ; for 
before a child has arrived at definite knowledge of the difference 
between the sexes, the missing penis, it does not distinguish in 
value between its father and its mother. I recently came across 
the instance of a young married woman whose story showed that, 
after noticing the lack of a penis in herself, she had supposed it 
to be absent not in all women, but only in those whom she 
regarded as inferior, and had still supposed that her mother 
possessed one. 

In order to simplify my presentment I shall discuss only 
identification with the father. 



40 


  


the object-choices belonging to the earliest sexual 
period and relating to the father and mother seem 
normally to find their outcome in an identification 
of the kind discussed, which would thus reinforce 
the primary one. 

The whole subject, however, is so complicated 
that it will be necessary to go into it more 
minutely. The intricacy of the problem is due 
to two factors : the triangular character of the 
Oedipus situation and the constitutional bisexuality 
of each individual. 

In its simplified form the case of the male child 
may be described as follows. At a very early age 
the little boy develops an object-cathexis of his 
mother, which originally related to the mother's 
breast and is the earliest instance of an object- 
choice on the anaclitic model ; his father the boy 
deals with by identifying himself with him. For 
a time these two relationships exist side by side, 
until the sexual wishes in regard to the mother 
become more intense and the father is perceived 
as an obstacle to them ; this gives rise to the 
Oedipus complex.* The identification with the 
father then takes on a hostile colouring and changes 
into a wish to get rid of the father in order to take 
his place with the mother. Henceforward the 

^ Cf. Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego, chap. vii. 



THE EGO AND THE SUPER-EGO (EGO-IDEAL) 4I 

relation to the father is ambivalent ; it seems as 
if the ambivalence inherent in the identification 
from the beginning had become manifest. An 
ambivalent attitude to the father and an object- 
relation of a purely affectionate kind to the mother 
make up the content of the simple positive Oedipus 
complex in the boy. 

Along with the dissolution of the Oedipus com- 
plex the object-cathexis of the mother must be 
given up. Its place may be filled by one of two 
things : either an identification with the mother or 
an intensified identification with the father. We 
are accustomed to regard the latter outcome as 
the more normal ; it permits the affectionate 
relation to the mother to be in a measure retained. 
In this way the passing of the Oedipus complex 
would consolidate the mascuUnity in the boy's 
character. In a precisely analogous way, the out- 
come of the Oedipus attitude in the little girl may 
be an intensification of the identification with her 
mother (or such an identification may thus be set 
up for the first time) — a result which wiU stamp the 
child's character in the feminine mould. 

These identifications are not what our previous 
statements would have led us to expect, since they 
do not involve the absorption of the abandoned 
object into the ego : but this alternative outcome 



42   

may also occur ; it is more readily observed in girls 
than in boys. Analysis very often shows that a little 
girl, after she heis had to relinquish her father as a 
love-object, will bring her masculinity into promi- 
nence and identify herself with her father, that is, 
with the object which has been lost, instead of with 
her mother. This will clearly depend on whether 
the masculinity in her disposition — whatever that 
may consist of — is strong enough. 

It would appear, therefore, that in both sexes 
the relative strength of the masculine and feminine 
sexual dispositions is what determines whether the 
outcome of the Oedipus situation shall be an 
identification with the father or with the mother. 
This is one of the ways in which bisexuality takes 
a hand in the subsequent vicissitudes of the 
Oedipus complex. The other way is even more 
important. For one gets the impression that the 
simple Oedipus complex is by no means its com- 
monest form, but rather represents a simplification 
or schematization which, to be sure, is often 
enough adequate for practical purposes. Closer 
study usually discloses the more complete Oedipus 
complex, which is twofold, positive and negative, 
and is due to the bisexuality originally present in 
children : that is to say, a boy has not merely an 
ambivalent attitude towards his father and an 



THE EGO AND THE SUPER-EGO (EGO-IDEAL) 43 

affectionate object-relation towards his mother, 
but at the same time he also b,ehaves like a girl 
and displays an affectionate feminine attitude to 
his father and a corresponding hostility and 
jealousy towards his mother. It is this complicat- 
ing element introduced by bisexuality that makes 
it so difficult to obtain a clear view of the facts in 
connection with the earliest object-choices and 
identifications, and still more difficult to describe 
them intelligibly. It may even be that the ambi- 
valence displayed in the relations to the parents 
should be attributed entirely to bisexuality and 
that it is not, as I stated just now, developed out 
of an identification in consequence of rivalry. 

In my opinion it is advisable in general, and 
quite especially where neurotics are concerned, to 
assume the existence of the complete Oedipus 
complex. Analytic experience then shows that in 
a number of cases one or the other of its con- 
stituents disappears, except for barely distinguish- 
able traces, so that a series can be formed with the 
normal positive Oedipus complex at one end and 
the inverted negative one at the other, while its 
intermediate members will exhibit the complete 
t3q)e with one or other of its two constituents pre- 
ponderating. As the Oedipus complex dissolves, 
the four trends of which it consists will group 



44   

themselves in such a way as to produce a father- 
identification and a mother-identification. The 
father-identification will preserve the object-rela- 
tion to the mother which belonged to the positive 
complex and will at the same time take the place 
of the object-relation to the father which belonged 
to the inverted complex : and the same will be 
true, mutatis mutandis, of the mother-identification. 
The relative intensity of the two identifications in 
any individual will reflect the preponderance in 
him of one or other of the two sexual dispositions. 

The broad general outcome of the sexual phase 
governed by the Oedipus complex may, therefore, be 
taken to be the forming of a precipitate in the ego, 
consisting of these two identifications in some way 
combined together. This modification of the ego 
retains its special position ; it stands in contrast to 
the other constituents of the ego in the form of an 
ego-ideal or super-ego. 

The super-ego is, however, not merely a deposit 
left by the earliest object-choices of the id ; it 
also represents an energetic reaction-formation 
against those choices. Its relation to the ego is 
not exhausted by the precept : ‘You ought to be 
such and such (like your father) ’ ; it also com- 
prises the prohibition ; ‘You must not be such and 
such (like your father) ; that is, you may not do 



THE EGO AND THE SUPER-EGO (EGO-IDEAL) 45 

all that he does ; many things are his prerogative 
This double aspect of the ego-ideal derives from 
the fact that the ego-ideal had the task of effecting 
the repression of the Oedipus complex, indeed, it 
is to that revolutionary event that it owes its 
existence. Clearly the repression of the Oedipus 
complex was no easy task. The parents, and 
especially the father, were perceived as the obstacle 
to realization of the Oedipus wishes ; so the child’s 
ego brought in a reinforcement to help in carrying 
out the repression by erecting this same obstacle 
within itself. The strength to do this was, so to 
speak, borrowed from the father, and this loan 
was an extraordinarily momentous act. The super- 
ego retains the character of the father, while the 
more intense the Oedipus complex was and the 
more rapidly it succumbed to repression (under the 
influence of discipline, religious teaching, schooling 
and reading) the more exacting later on is the 
domination of the super-ego over the ego — in the 
form of conscience or perhaps of an unconscious 
sense of guilt. I shall later on bring forward a 
suggestion about the source of the power it 
employs to dominate in this way, the source, that 
is, of its compulsive character which manifests 
itself in the form of a categorical imperative. 

If we consider once more the origin of the 



  


46 

super-ego as we have described it, we shall perceive 
it to be the outcome of two highly important 
factors, one of them biological and the other 
historical : namely, the lengthy duration in man 
of the helplessness and dependence belonging to 
childhood, and the fact of his Oedipus complex, 
the repression of which we have shown to be 
connected with the interruption of libidinal de- 
velopment by the latency period and so with the 
twofold onset of activity characteristic of man's 
sexual life.^ According to the view of one psycho- 
analyst, the last-mentioned phenomenon, which 
seems to be peculiar to man, is a heritage of the 
cultural development necessitated by the glacial 
epoch. We see, then, that the differentiation of 
the super-ego from the ego is no matter of chance ; 
it stands as the representative of the most im- 
portant events in the development both of the 
individual and of the race ; indeed, by giving 
permanent expression to the influence of the 
parents it perpetuates the existence of the factors 
to which it owes its origin. 

Psycho-analysis has been reproached time after 
time with ignoring the higher, moral, spiritual side 
of human nature. The reproach is doubly unjust, 

^ [This sentence represents a slight modification of the original 
text in accordance with direct instructions from the author. — 
Trans.] 



THE EGO AND THE SUPER-EGO (EGO-IDEAL) 47 

both historically and methodologically. For, in 
the first place, we have from the very beginning 
attributed the function of instigating repression to 
the moral and aesthetic tendencies in the ego, and 
secondly, there has been a general refusal to 
recognize that psycho-analytic research could not 
produce a complete and finished body of doctrine, 
like a philosophical system, ready-made, but had 
to find its way step by step along the path towards 
understanding the intricacies of the mind by 
making an analytic dissection of both normal and 
abnormal phenomena. So long as the study of the 
repressed part of the mind was our task, there was 
no need for us to feel any agitated apprehensions 
about the existence of the higher side of mental 
life. But now that we have embarked upon the 
analysis of the ego we can give an answer to all 
those whose moral sense has been shocked and 
who have complained that there must surely be a 
higher nature in man : ‘ Very true,' we can say, 
‘ and here we have that higher nature, in this ego- 
ideal or super-ego, the representative of our rela- 
tion to our parents. When we were little children 
we knew these higher natures, we admired them 
and feared them ; and later we took them into 
ourselves.' 

/ The ego-ideal, therefore, is the heir of the 



48   

Oedipus complex and thus it is also the expression 
of the most powerful impulses and most important 
vicissitudes experienced by the hbido in the id. 
By setting up this ego-ideal the ego masters its 
Oedipus complex and at the same time places 
itself in subjection to the id. Whereas the ego is 
essentially the representative of the external world, 
of reality, the super-ego stands in contrast to it as 
the representative of the internal world, of the id. 
Conflicts between  eal will, as we 
are now prepared to find, ultimately reflect the 
contrast between what is real and what is mental, 
between the external world and the internal world. 

Through the forming of the ideal, all the traces 
left behind in the id by biological developments 
and by the vicissitudes gone through by the human 
race are taken over by the ego and lived through 
again by it in each individual. Owing to the way 
in which it is formed, the ego-ideal has a great 
many points of contact with the phylogenetic 
endowment of each individual — his archaic heri- 
tage. And thus it is that what belongs to the 
lowest depths in the minds of each one of us is 
changed, through this formation of the ideal, into 
what we value as the highest in the human soul. 
It would be vain, however, to attempt to localize 
the ego-ideal, even in the sense in which we have 



THE EGO AND THE SUPER-EGO (EGO-IDEAL) 49 

localized the ego, or to work it into any of those 
analogies with the help of which we have tried 
to picture the relation between the ego and 
the id. 

^ It is easy to show that the ego-ideal answers in 
every way to what is expected of the higher 
nature of man. In so far as it is a substitute for 
the longing for a father, it contains the germ from 
which aU religions have evolved. The self- judge- 
ment which declares that the ego falls short of its 
ideal produces the sense of worthlessness with 
which the religious believer attests his longing. 
As a child grows up, the office of father is carried 
on by masters and by others in authority ; the 
power of their injunctions and prohibitions remains 
vested in the ego-ideal and continues, in the form 
of conscience, to exercise the censorship of morals. 
The tension between the demands of conscience 
and the actual attainments of the ego is experienced 
as a sense of guilt. Social feelings rest on the 
foundation of identifications with others, on the 
basis of an ego-ideal in common with them. 

Rehgion, morality, and a social sense — ^the chief 
elements of what is highest in man ^ — were origin- 
ally one and the same thing. According to the 
h5^othesis which I have put forward in Totem und 

^ 1 am at the moment putting science and art on one side. 

D 



50   

Tabu they were acquired phylogenetically out of 
the father-complex : religion and moral restraint 
by the actual process of mastering the Oedipus 
complex itself, and social feeling from the necessity 
for overcoming the rivalry that then remained 
between the members of the younger generation. 
It seems that the male sex has taken the lead in 
developing all of these moral acquisitions ; and 
that they have then been transmitted to women 
by cross-inheritance. Even to-day the social feel- 
ings arise in the individual as a superstructure 
founded upon impulses of jealousy and rivalry 
against his brothers and sisters. Since the enmity 
cannot be gratified there develops an identification 
with the former rival. The study of mild cases of 
homosexuality confirms the suspicion that in this 
instance, too, the identification is a substitute for 
an affectionate object-choice which has succeeded 
the hostile, aggressive attitude.^ 

With the mention of phylogenesis, however, 
fresh problems arise, from which one is tempted 
to shrink back dismayed. But there is no help 
for it, the attempt must be made ; in spite of a fear 
that it will lay bare the inadequacy of the whole 
structure that we have so arduously built up. The 

^ Cf. Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego ; and 
‘ Certain Neurotic Mechanisms in Jealousy, Paranoia and Homo- 
sexuality ’ (1922), Collected Papers, vol. ii. 



THE EGO AND THE SUPER-EGO (EGO-IDEAL) 5 1 

question is : which was it, the ego of primitive 
man or his id, that acquired religion and morality 
in those early days out of the father-complex ? 
If it was his ego, why do we not speak simply of 
these things being inherited by the ego ? If it 
was the id, how does that agree with the character 
of the id ? Or are we wrong in carr 3 dng the 
differentiation between ego, super-ego, and id back 
into such early times ? Or should we not honestly 
confess that our whole conception of the processes 
within the ego is of no help in understanding 
phylogenesis and cannot be applied to it ? 

Let us answer first what is easiest to answer. 
The differentiation between ego and id must be 
attributed not only to primitive man but even to 
much simpler forms of life, for it is the inevitable 
expression of the influence of the external world. 
The super-ego, according to our h5q5othesis, actually 
originated from the experiences that led to 
totemism. The question whether it was the ego 
or the id that experienced and acquired these 
things soon ceases to have any meaning. Reflec- 
tion at once shows us that no external vicissitudes 
can be experienced or undergone by the id, except 
by way of the ego, which is the representative of 
the outer world to the id. Nevertheless it is not 
possible to speak of direct inheritance by the ego. 
It is here that the gulf between the actual indi- 
vidual and the conception of the species becomes 
evident. Moreover, one must not take the differ- 
ence between ego and id in too hard-and-fast a 
sense, nor forget that the ego is a pcirt of the id 
which has been specially modified. The experi- 
ences undergone by the ego seem at first to be lost 
to posterity ; but, when they have been repeated 
often enough and with sufficient intensity in the 
successive individuals of many generations, they 
transform themselves, so to say, into experiences 
of the id, the impress of which is preserved by 
inheritance. Thus in the id, which is capable of 
being inherited, are stored up vestiges of the 
existences led by countless former egos ; and, 
when the ego forms its super-ego out of the id, 
it may perhaps only be reviving images of egos 
that have passed away and be securing them a 
resurrection. 

The way in which the super-ego came into 
being explains how it is that the earlier conflicts 
of the ego with the object-cathexes of the id can 
be carried on and continued in conflicts with their 
successor, the super-ego. If the ego has not 
succeeded in mastering the Oedipus complex satis- 
factorily, the energic cathexis of the latter, spring- 
ing from the id, will find an outlet in the reaction- 



THE EGO AND THE SUPER-EGO (EGO-IDEAL) 53 

formations of the ego-ideal. The very free com- 
munication possible between the ideal and these 
Ucs instinctual trends explains how it is that the 
ideal itself can be to a great extent unconscious 
and inaccessible to the ego. The struggle which 
once raged in the deepest strata of the mind, and 
was not brought to an end by rapid sublimation 
and identification, is now carried on in a higher 
region, like the Battle of the Huns which in 
Kaulbach’s painting is being fought out in the sky. 



IV 


THE TWO CLASSES OF INSTINCTS 


y 


Wi 


'E have already said that, if the dif- 
ferentiation we have made of the 
mind into an id, an ego, and a super- 
ego represents any advance in our knowledge, it 
ought to enable us to understand more thoroughly 
the dynamic relations within the mind and to 
describe them more clearly. We have also already 
reached the conclusion that the ego is especially 
affected by perception, and that, speaking broadly, 
perceptions may be said to have the same signi- 
ficance for the ego as instincts have for the id. 
At the same time the ego is subject to the influence 
of the instincts, too, like the id, of which it is in 
fact only a specially modified part. 

I have lately developed a view of the instincts * 
which I shall here hold to and take as the basis 
of further discussions. According to this view we 


Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 
54 



THE TWO CLASSES OF INSTINCTS 55 

have to distinguish two classes of instincts, one of 
which, Eros or the sexual instincts, is by far the 
more conspicuous and accessible to study. It 
comprises not merely the uninhibited sexual 
instinct proper and the impulses of a sublimated 
or aim-inhibited nature derived from it, but also 
the self-preservative instinct, which must be 
assigned to the ego and which at the beginning of 
our analytic work we had good reason for setting 
in opposition to the sexual object-instincts. The 
second class of instincts was not so easy to define ; 
in the end we came to recognize sadism as its 
representative. As a result of theoretical con- 
siderations, supported by biology, we assumed the 
existence of a death-instinct, the task of which is 
to lead organic matter back into the inorganic 
state ; on the other hand, we supposed that Eros 
aims at complicating life by bringing about a more 
and more far-reaching coalescence of the particles 
into which living matter has been dispersed, thus, 
of course, aiming at the maintenance of life. 
Acting in this way, both the instincts would be 
conservative in the strictest sense of the word, 
since both would be endeavouring to re-establish a 
state of things that was disturbed by the emergence 
of life. The appearance of life would thus be 
regarded as the cause of the continuance of life 



56 


  


and also as the cause of the striving towards 
death ; and life itself would be a conflict and 
compromise between these two trends. The prob- 
lem of the origin of hfe would remain a cosmo- 
logical one ; and the problem of the purpose and 
goal of life would be answered dualistically. 

On this view a special physiological process (of 
anabohsm or katabolism) would be associated with 
each of the two classes of instincts ; both instincts 
would be active in every particle of living sub- 
stance, although in unequal proportions, so that 
some one substance might be the principal repre- 
sentative of Eros. 

This hypothesis throws no light whatever upon 
the manner in which the two classes of instincts are 
fused, blended, and mingled with each other ; but 
that this takes place regularly and very extensively 
is lUi assumption indispensable to our conception. 
It appears that, as a result of the combination of 
unicellular organisms into multicellular forms of 
life, the death-instinct of the single ceU can success- 
fully be neutralized and the destructive impulses 
be diverted towards the external world through 
the instrumentality of a special organ. This special 
organ would seem to be the musculature ; and the 
death-instinct would thus seem to express itself — 
though probably only in part — as an instinct of 



THE TWO CLASSES OF INSTINCTS 57 

destruction directed against the external world and 
other living organisms. 

Once we have admitted the conception of a 
fusion of the two classes of instincts with each 
other, the possibility of a — more or less complete — 
‘ defusion ’ of them forces itself upon us. The 
sadistic component of the sexual instinct would be 
a classical example of instinctual fusion serving a 
useful purpose ; and the perversion in which 
sadism has made itself independent would be 
typical of defusion, though not of absolutely com- 
plete defusion. From this point we obtain a new 
view of a great array of facts which have not 
before been considered in this light. We perceive 
that for purposes of discharge the instinct of 
destruction is habitually enlisted in the service of 
Eros ; we suspect that the epileptic fit is a product 
and sign of instinctual defusion ; and we come to 
understand that defusion and the marked emerg- 
ence of the death-instinct are among the most note- 
worthy effects of many severe neuroses, e.g. the 
obsessional neuroses. Making a swift generaliza- 
tion, we might conjecture that the essence of a 
regression of libido, e.g. from the genital to the 
sadistic-anal level, would lie in a defusion of 
instincts, just as, conversely, the advance from an 
earlier to the definitive genital phase would be 



58   

conditioned by an accession of erotic components. 
The question also arises whether ordinary ambi- 
valence, which is so often unusually strong in the 
constitutional disposition to neurosis, should not 
be regarded as the product of a defusion ; ambi- 
valence, however, is such a fundamental pheno- 
menon that it more probably represents a state of 
incomplete fusion. 

It is natural that we should now turn with 
interest to inquire whether there may not be 
instructive connections to be traced between the 
formations we have assumed to exist in the mind 
— the ego, the super-ego, and the id — and the two 
classes of instincts ; and, further, whether the 
pleasure-principle which dominates mental pro- 
cesses can be shown to have any constant relation 
both to the two classes of instincts and to these 
differentiations which we have drawn within the 
mind. But before we discuss this, we must clear 
away a doubt which arises concerning the terms 
of the problem itself. There can be no doubt 
about the pleasure-principle, and the differentia- 
tions within the ego have good clinical justification, 
but the distinction between the two classes of 
instincts does not seem sufficiently assured and it 
is possible that facts of clinical analysis may be 
found to conflict with it. 



THE TWO CLASSES OF INSTINCTS 59 

One such fact appears to exist. Instead of the 
opposition between the two classes of instincts let 
us consider the polarity of love and hate. (There 
is no difficulty in finding a representative of Eros ; 
but we must be grateful that we can find a repre- 
sentative of the elusive death-instinct in the 
instinct of destruction, for which hate points the 
way.) Now, clinical observation shows not only ■« 
that love is with unexpected regularity accom- 
panied by hate (ambivalence), and not only that 
in human relationships hate is frequently a fore- 
runner of love, but also that in many circum- 
stances hate changes into love and love into hate. 

If this change is anything more than a mere / 
succession in time, then clearly the ground is cut 
away from under a distinction so fundamental as 
that between erotic instincts and death-instincts, 
one which presupposes the existence of physio- 
logical processes running counter to each other. 

Now the case in which someone first loves and 
then hates the same person (or the reverse), because 
that person has given him cause for doing so, has 
obviously nothing to do with our problem. Nor 
has the other case in which feelings of love that 
have not yet become manifest express themselves 
to begin with by enmity and aggressive tendencies ; 
for it may be that here the destructive components 



6o 


  


in the object-cathexis have outstripped the erotic 
and are only later on joined by the latter. But 
we know of several instances in the psychology of 
the neuroses in which there are better groimds for 
assuming that a transformation does take place. 
In persecutory paranoia the sufferer takes a 
particular way of defending himself against an 
unduly strong homosexual attachment to a given 
person, with the result that the person he once 
loved most is changed into a persecutor and then 
becomes the object of aggressive and often danger- 
ous impulses on the part of the patient. Here 
we have grounds for interposing an intermediate 
phase in which the love is trcinsformed into hate. 
Analytic investigation has only lately revealed 
that the sources of homosexuality and of de- 
sexualized social feelings include very intense feel- 
ings of rivalry giving rise to aggressive desires, 
which, after they have been surmounted, are 
succeeded by love for the object that was formerly 
hated or by an identification with it. The question 
arises whether in these instances we are to assume 
a direct transformation of hate into love. It is 
clear that here the changes are purely internal and 
an alteration in the behaviour of the object plays 
no part in them. 

There is another possible mechanism, however. 



THE TWO CLASSES OF INSTINCTS 6l 

which we have come to know of by analytic 
investigation of the processes concerned in the 
change in paranoia. An ambivalent attitude is 
present from the outset and the transformation is 
effected by means of a reactive shifting of cathexis, 
by which energy is withdrawn from the erotic 
impulses and used to supplement the hostile energy. 

Not quite the same thing but something like it 
happens when a hostile attitude of rivalry is over- 
come and leads to homosexuaUty. The hostile 
attitude has no prospect of gratification ; conse- 
quently — i.e. as an economic measure — it is re- 
placed by a loving attitude for which there is 
more hope of satisfaction, that is, possibility of 
discharge. So we see that we are not obliged in 
either of these cases to assume a direct transforma- 
tion of hate into love which would be incompatible 
with a qualitative distinction between the two 
classes of instincts. 

^ It appears, however, that by including in our 
calculations this other mechanism by means of 
which love can be changed into hate, we have 
tacitly made another assumption which deserves 
to be formulated expUcitly. We have reckoned as 
though there existed in the mind — whether in the 
ego or in the id — a displaceable energy, which is 
in itself neutral, but is able to join forces either 



62   

with an erotic or with a destructive impulse, 
differing qualitatively as they do, and augment its 
total cathexis. Without assuming the existence 
of a displaceable energy of this kind we can make 
no headway. The only question is where it comes 
from, what it belongs to, and what it signifies. 

The problem of the quality of instinctual im- 
pulses and of its persistence throughout their 
vicissitudes is still very obscure and has hardly 
been attacked up to the present. In the sexual 
component-instincts, which are especially access- 
ible to observation, it is possible to perceive the 
working of processes which are in the same category 
as what we are discussing ; e.g. we see that some 
degree of communication exists between the com- 
ponent instincts, that an instinct deriving from 
one particular erotogenic source can make over its 
intensity to reinforce another component-instinct 
originating in another source, that gratification of 
one instinct can take the place of gratification of 
another, and many more facts of the same nature 
— all of which must encourage us to venture upon 
certain assumptions. 

In the present discussion, moreover, I am 
putting forward nothing but a supposition ; I 
have no proof to offer. It seems a plausible view 
that this neutral displaceable energy, which is 



THE TWO CLASSES OF INSTINCTS 63 

probably active alike in the ego and in the id, 
proceeds from the narcissistic reservoir of hbido, 
i.e. that it is desexualized Eros. (The erotic 
instincts appear to be altogether more plastic, more 
readily diverted and displaced than the destructive 
instincts.) From this we can easily go on to 
assume that this displaceable libido is employed in 
the service of the pleasure-principle to obviate 
accumulations and to facilitate discharge. It is 
clear, incidentally, that there is a certain indiffer- 
ence about the path along which the discharge 
takes place, so long as it takes place somehow. 
We know this trait ; it is characteristic of the 
cathectic processes in the id. It is found in erotic 
cathexes, where a peculiar indifference in regard 
to the object displays itself ; and it is especially 
evident in the transferences arising in analysis, 
which develop inevitably no matter who the 
analyst may be. Rank has recently published 
some good examples of the way in which neurotic 
acts of revenge can be directed against the wrong 
people. Such behaviour on the part of the un- 
conscious reminds one of the comic story of the 
three village tailors, one of whom had to be 
hanged because the only village blacksmith had 
committed a capital offence. The penalty must 
be exacted even if it does not faU upon the guilty. 



64   

It was in studying dream-work that we first came 
upon this kind of looseness in the displacements 
brought about by the primary process. In that 
case it was the objects that were thus relegated to 
a position of no more than secondary importance, 
just as in the case we are now discussing it is the 
paths of discharge. It would seem to be char- 
acteristic of the ego to be more particular both 
about the choice of an object and about the path 
of discharge. 

If this displaceable energy is desexualized libido, 
it might also be described as sublimated energy ; 
for it would still retain the main purpose of Eros 
— that of xmiting and binding — in so far as it 
helped towards establishing that unity, or tendency 
to unity, which is particularly characteristic of the 
ego. If the intellectual processes in the wider 
sense are to be classed among these displacements, 
then the energy for the work of thought itself 
must be supplied from sublimated erotic sources. 

Here we arrive again at the possibility which 
has already been discussed that sublimation may 
take place regularly through the mediation of the 
ego. The other case will be recollected, in which 
the ego deals with the first object-cathexes of the 
id (and certainly with later ones too) by taking 
over the libido from them into itself and binding 



THE TWO CLASSES OF INSTINCTS 65 

it to the ego-modification produced by means of 
identification. The transformation of erotic libido 
into ego-libido of course involves an abandonment 
of sexual aims, a desexualization. In any case 
this throws hght upon an important fimction of the 
ego in its relation to Eros. By thus obtaining 
possession of the libido from the object-cathexes, 
setting itself up as sole love-object, and desexualiz- 
ing or sublimating the libido of the id, the ego is 
working in opposition to the purposes of Eros and 
placing itself at the service of the opposing in- 
stinctual trends. It has to acquiesce in some of 
the other object-cathexes of the id ; it has to go 
hand in hand with them, so to speak. We shall 
come back later to another possible consequence 
of this activity of the ego. 

This would seem to imply an important ampli- 
fication of the theory of narcissism. At the very 
beginning all the libido is accumulated in the id, 
while the ego is still in process of formation or far 
from robust. Part of this libido is sent out by 
the id into erotic object-cathexes, whereupon the 
ego, now growing stronger, attempts to obtain 
possession of this object-libido and to force itself 
upon the id as a love-object. The narcissism of 
the ego is thus seen to be secondary, acquired by 
the withdrawal of the libido from objects. 


E 



66 


  


Over and over again we find on tracing instinct- 
ual impulses back that they disclose themselves 
as derivatives of Eros. If it were not for the 
considerations put forward in Beyond the Pleasure 
Principle, and ultimately for the sadistic con- 
stituents which have attached themselves to Eros, 
we should have difi&culty in holding to our funda- 
mental dualistic point of view. But since we 
cannot escape that view, we are driven to conclude 
that the death-instincts are by their nature mute 
and that the clamour of life proceeds for the most 
part from Eros.^ 

And from the struggle against Eros ! It can 
hardly be doubted that the pleasure-principle 
serves the id as a compass in its struggle against 
the libido — the force that introduces such disturb- 
ances into the process of hfe. If it is true that 
life is governed by Fechner’s principle of constant 
equilibrium, it consists of a continuous descent 
towards death ; but the falling of the level is 
delayed and fresh tensions are introduced by the 
claims of Eros, of the sexual instincts, as expressed 
in instinctual needs. The id, guided by the 
pleasure-principle, that is, by the perception of 
‘ pain ’, guards itself against these tensions in 

^ In fact, according to our view it is through the agency of 
Eros that the destructive instincts that are directed towards the 
external world have been diverted from the self. 



THE TWO CLASSES OF INSTINCTS 67 

various ways. It does so in the first place by 
complying as swiftly as possible with the demands 
of the non-desexualized libido, i.e. by striving for 
the gratification of the directly sexual trends. 
But it does so further, and in a far more compre- 
hensive fashion, in relation to one particular form 
of gratification which subsumes all component 
claims — that is, by discharge of the sexual sub- 
stances, which are saturated conductors, so to 
speak, of the erotic tensions. The ejection of 
sexual substances in the sexual act corresponds in 
a certain degree with the separation of soma 
and germ-plasm. This accounts for the likeness 
between dying and the condition that follows com- 
plete sexual satisfaction, and for the fact that 
death coincides with the act of copulation in some 
of the lower animals. These creatures die in the 
act of reproduction because, after Eros has been 
eliminated through the process of gratification, the 
death-instinct has a free hand for accomplishing 
its purposes. Finally, as we have seen, the ego, 
by sublimating some of the libido for itself and its 
purposes, assists the id in its work of mastering 
the tensions. 



V 


THE SUBORDINATE RELATIONSHIPS 
OF THE EGO 

T he complexity of our subject-matter must 
be an excuse for the fact that none of the 
chapter-headings of this book correspond 
entirely to their contents, and that in turning to new 
aspects of the problem we constantly hark back 
to matters that have already been dealt with. 

As has been said repeatedly, the ego is formed 
to a great extent out of identifications taking the 
place of cathexes on the part of the id which have 
been abandoned ; the earliest of these identifica- 
tions always fulfil a special office in the ego and 
stand apart from the rest of the ego in the form of 
a super-ego, while later on, as it grows stronger, 
the ego may become more able to withstand the 
effects of identifications. The super-ego owes its 
special position in the ego, or in regard to the ego, 
to a factor which must be considered from two 
sides : to the fact that on the one hand it was the 


68 



SUBORDINATE RELATIONSHIPS OF THE EGO 69 

first identification and one which took place 
while the ego was still feeble, and that on the 
other hand it was the heir to the Oedipus 
complex and thus incorporated into the ego 
objects of far greater significance than any others. 
The super-ego’s relation to the subsequent modi- 
fications effected in the ego is roughly that of the 
primary sexual period in childhood to full-grown 
sexual activity after puberty. Although it is 
amenable to every later influence, it preserves 
throughout life the character given to it by its 
derivation from the father-complex, namely, the 
capacity to stand apart from the ego and to rule 
it. It is a memorial of the former weakness and 
dependence of the ego and the mature ego remains 
subject to its domination. As the child was once 
compelled to obey its parents, so the ego submits 
to the categorical imperative pronounced by its 
super-ego. 

The descent of the super-ego from the first 
object-cathexes of the id, from the Oedipus com- 
plex, however, signifies even more for it. This 
descent, as we have already described, connects 
it with the phylogenetic acquisitions of the id and 
makes it a reincarnation of former ego-structures 
which have left their precipitates behind in the id. 
Thus the super-ego is always in close touch with 



70   

the id and can act as its representative in relation 
to the ego. It reaches deep down into the id and 
is for that reason farther from consciousness than 
the ego.^ 

We can best appreciate these relations by turn- 
ing our attention to certain clinical facts, which 
have long since lost their novelty but which still 
await theoretical discussion. 

There are certain people who behave in a quite 
peculiar fashion during the work of analysis. 
When one speaks hopefully to them or expresses 
satisfaction with the progress of the treatment, 
they show signs of discontent and their condition 
invariably becomes worse. One begins by regard- 
ing this as defiance and as an attempt to prove 
their superiority to the physician, but later one 
comes to take a deeper and truer view. One 
becomes convinced, not only that such people 
cannot endure any praise or appreciation, but that 
they react inversely to the progress of the treat- 
ment. Every partial solution that ought to result, 
and in other people does result, in an improvement 
or a temporary suspension of s3miptoms produces 
in them for the time being an exacerbation of their 
illness ; they get worse during the treatment 

^ It may be said that the psycho-analytical or metapsycho- 
logical ego stands on its head no less than the anatomical ego — 
the ‘ cortical homunculus 



SUBORDINATE RELATIONSHIPS OF THE EGO 7I 

instead of getting better. They exhibit the so- 
called negative therapeutic reaction. 

* There is no doubt that there is something in 
these people that sets itself against their recovery 
and dreads its approach as though it were a danger. 
We are accustomed to say that the need for illness 
has got the upper hand in them over the desire 
for health. If we analyse this resistance in the 
usual way — then, even after we have subtracted 
from it the defiant attitude towards the physician 
and the fixation on the various kinds of advantage 
which the patient derives from the illness, the 
greater part of it is still left over ; and this reveals 
itself as the most powerful of all obstacles to 
recovery, more powerful even than such familiar 
ones as narcissistic inaccessibility, the assumption 
of a negative attitude towards the physician or a 
clinging to the advantages of the illness. 

In the end we come to see that we are dealing 
with what may be called a ‘ moral ’ factor, a sense 
of guilt, which is finding atonement in the illness 
and is refusing to give up the penalty of suffering. 
We are justified in regarding this rather dishearten- 
ing explanation as conclusive. But as far as the 
patient is concerned this sense of guilt is dumb ; 
it does not tell him he is guilty ; he does not feel 
guilty, he simply feels ill. This sense of guilt 



72 


  


expresses itself only as a resistance to recovery 
which it is extremely difficult to overcome. It is 
also particularly difficult to convince the patient 
that this motive hes behind his continuing to be 
ill ; he holds fast to the more obvious explanation 
that treatment by analysis is not the right remedy 
for his case.^ 

The description we have given applies to the 
most extreme instances of this state of affairs, but 

/ * The battle with the obstacle of an unconscious sense of 

guilt is not made easy for the analyst. Nothing can be done 
against it directly, and nothing indirectly but the slow procedure 
of unmasking its unconscious repressed roots, and of thus gradu- 
ally changing it into a conscious sense of guilt. One has a special 
opportunity for influencing it when this Ucs sense of guilt is a 
‘ borrowed ’ one, i,e. when it is the product of an identification 
with some other person who was once the object of an erotic 
cathexis. When the sense of guilt has been adopted in this way 
it is often the sole remaining trace of the abandoned love-relation 
and not at all easy to recognize as such. (The likeness between 
this process and what happens in melancholia is unmistakable.) 
If one can unmask this former object-cathexis behind the Ucs 
sense of guilt, the therapeutic success is often brilliant, but other- 
wise the outcome of one’s efforts is by no means certain. It 
depends principally on the intensity of the sense of guilt ; there 
is often no counteracting force of similar strength which the 
treatment can put in motion against it. Perhaps it may depend, 
too, on whether the personality of the analyst allows of the 
patient’s putting him in the place of his ego-ideal, and this 
involves a temptation for the analyst to play the part of prophet, 
saviour, and redeemer to the patient. Since the rules of analysis 
are diametrically opposed to the physician’s making use of his 
personality in any such manner, it must be honestly confessed 
that here we have another limitation to the effectiveness of 
analysis ; after all, analysis does not set out to abolish the 
possibility of morbid reactions, but to give the patient's ego 
freedom to choose one way or the other. 



SUBORDINATE RELATIONSHIPS OF THE EGO 73 

in a lesser measure this factor has to be reckoned 
with in very many cases, perhaps in all severe 
cases of neurosis. In fact it may be precisely this 
element in the situation, the attitude of the ego- 
ideal, that determines the severity of a neurotic 
illness. We shall not hesitate, therefore, to discuss 
rather more fully the way in which the sense of 
guilt expresses itself under different conditions. 

An explanation of the normal conscious sense 
of guilt (conscience) presents no difficulties ; it is 
due to tension between the ego and the ego-ideal 
and is the expression of a condemnation of the 
ego pronounced by its criticizing fimction. The 
feelings of inferiority so well known in neurotics 
are presumably closely related to it. In two very 
familiar maladies the sense of guilt is over-strongly 
conscious ; in them the ego-ideal displays particular 
severity and often rages against the ego with the 
utmost cruelty. The attitude of the ego-ideal in 
these two diseases, the obsessional neurosis and 
melancholia, presents, alongside of this similarity, 
differences that are no less significant. 

In certain forms of the obsessional neurosis the 
sense of guilt expresses itself loudly but cannot 
justify itself to the ego. Consequently the patient’s 
ego rebels against this imputation of guilt and seeks 
the physician’s support in repudiating it. It would 
be folly to acquiesce in this, for to do so would 
have no effect. Analysis shows that the super-ego 
is being influenced by processes that have remained 
hidden from the ego. It is possible to discover the 
repressed impulses which really occasion the sense 
of guilt. The super-ego is thus proved to have 
known more than the ego about the unconscious id. 

In melancholia the impression that the super- 
ego has obtained a hold upon consciousness is even 
stronger. But in this case the ego ventures no 
objection ; it admits the guilt and submits to the 
punishment. The explanation of this difference is 
plain. In the obsessional neurosis the reprehen- 
sible impulses which are being criticized by the 
super-ego have never formed part of the ego, 
while in melancholia the object of the super-ego’s 
wrath has become part of the ego through 
identification. 

It is certainly not clear why the sense of guilt 
reaches such an extraordinary intensity in these 
two neurotic disorders ; and indeed, the main 
problem presented in this state of affairs lies in 
another direction. We shall postpone discussion 
of it until we have dealt with the other cases — in 
which the sense of guilt remains unconscious. 

It is essentially in hysteria and in states of a 
hysterical type that this condition is found. The 



SUBORDINATE RELATIONSHIPS OF THE EGO 75 

mechanism by which the sense of guUt is kept im- 
conscious is easy to discover. The hysterical type 
of ego defends itself from the painful perception 
which the criticisms of its super-ego threaten to 
produce in it by the same means that it uses to 
defend itself from an unendurable object-cathexis — 
by an act of repression. It is the ego, therefore, 
that is responsible for the sense of guilt remaining 
unconscious. We know that as a rule the ego 
carries out repressions in the service and at the 
behest of its super-ego ; but this is a case in which 
it has turned the same weapon against its harsh 
taskmaster. In the obsessional neurosis, as we 
know, the phenomena of reaction-formation pre- 
dominate ; but here the ego contents itself with 
keeping at a distance the material to which the 
sense of guilt refers. 

One may go further and venture the hypothesis 
that a great part of the sense of guilt must normally 
remain imconscious, because the origin of con- 
science is closely connected with the Oedipus com- 
plex which belongs to the unconscious. If any 
one were inclined to put forward the paradoxical 
proposition that the normal man is not only far 
more immoral than he believes but also far more 
moral than he has any idea of, psycho-ansdysis, 
which is responsible for the first half of the asser- 



  


76 

tion, would have no objection to raise against the 
second half.^ 

It was a surprise to find that exacerbation of 
this Ucs sense of guilt could turn people into 
criminals. But it is undoubtedly a fact. In many 
criminals, especially youthful ones, it is possible to 
detect a very powerful sense of guilt which existed 
before the crime, and is not therefore the result of 
it but its motive. It is as if it had been a rehef 
to be able to fasten this unconscious sense of guilty 
on to something real and immediate. 

In all these situations the super-ego displays its 
independence of the conscious ego and the close- 
ness of its relations with the unconscious id. And 
now, having regard to the importance we ascribed 
to preconscious verbal residues in the ego, the 
question arises whether the super-ego, if it is in 
part unconscious, can consist in such verbal images, 
or, if not, in what it does consist. Our answer, 
though it does not carry us very far, will be that 
it cannot possibly be disputed that the super-ego, 
no less than the ego, is derived from auditory 
impressions ; it is part of the ego and remains to 
a great extent accessible to consciousness by way 

^ This proposition is only apparently a paradox ; it simply 
states that human nature has a far greater capacity, both for 
good and for evil, than it thinks it has, i.e. than it is aware of 
through the conscious perceptions of the ego. 



SUBORDINATE RELATIONSHIPS OF THE EGO 77 

of these verbal images (concepts, abstractions), but 
the cathectic energy of these elements of the super- 
ego does not originate from the auditory percep- 
tions, instruction, reading, etc., but from sources 
in the id. 

^ The question which we postponed answering 
runs thus : How is it that the super-ego manifests 
itself essentially as a sense of guilt (or rather, as 
criticism — for the sense of guilt is the perception 
in the ego which corresponds to the criticism) and 
at the same time develops such extraordinary 
harshness and severity towards the ego ? If we 
turn to melancholia first, we find that the excess- 
ively strong super-ego which has obtained a hold 
upon consciousness rages against the ego with 
merciless fury, as if it had taken possession of the 
whole of the sadism available in the person con- 
cerned. Following our view of sadism, we should 
say that the destructive component had entrenched 
itself in the super-ego and turned against the ego. 
What is now holding sway in the super-ego is, as 
it were, a pure culture of the death-instinct, and 
in fact it often enough succeeds in driving the ego 
into death, if the latter does not protect itself from 
the tyrant in time by a revulsion into mania. 

The reproaches of conscience in certain forms 
of obsessional neurosis are just as painful and 



78 


  


tormenting, but here the situation is less per- 
spicuous. It is remarkable that the obsessional 
neurotic, in contrast to the melancholiac, never 
takes the step of self-destruction ; he is as if 
immune against the danger of suicide, and is far 
better protected from it than the hysteric. We 
can see that what guarantees the safety of the ego 
is the fact that the object has been retained. In 
the obsessional neurosis it has become possible, 
through a regression to the pre-genital organiza- 
tion, for the love-impulses to transform themselves 
into impulses of aggression against the object. 
Here again the instinct of destruction has been set 
free and it aims at destroying the object, or at 
least it appears to have this aim. These tend- 
encies have not been adopted by the ego ; it 
struggles against them with reaction-formations 
and precautionary measures, and they remain in 
the id. The super-ego, however, behaves as if the 
ego were responsible for them and shows by its 
zeal in chastising these destructive intentions that 
they are no mere semblance evoked by regression 
but an actual substitution of hate for love. Help- 
less in either direction, the ego defends itself vainly, 
alike against the instigations of the murderous id 
and against the reproaches of the punishing con- 
science. It succeeds in holding in check at least 



SUBORDINATE RELATIONSHIPS OF THE EGO 79 

the most brutal actions of both sides ; the first 
outcome is interminable self-torment, and eventu- 
ally there follows a systematic torturing of the 
object, in so far as it is within reach.


