n his preface to The Use of Pleasure, as well as in a chapter of The Care of
the Self, Michel Foucault made mention of.my article 'Exercices spirituels',
the first version of which dates back to 1976. Foucault seems to have been
particularly interested by the following points, which I developed in this
article: the description of ancient philosophy as an art, style, or way of life;
the attempt I made to explain how modern philosophy had forgotten this
tradition, and had become an almost entirely theoretical discourse; and the
idea I sketched out in the article, and have developed more fully above, that
Christianity had taken over as its own certain techniques of spiritual exercises,
as they had already been practiced in antiquity.
Here, I should like to offer a few remarks with a view to delineating the
differences of interpretation, and in the last analysis of philosophical choice,
which separate us, above and beyond our points of agreement. These
differences could have provided the substance for a dialogue between us,
which, unfortunately, was interrupted all too soon by Foucault's premature
death.
In The Care of the Self, Foucault meticulously describes what he terms the
" practices of the self " (pratiques de soi), recommended in antiquity by Stoic
philosophers. These include the care of one's self, which can only be carried
out under the direction of a spiritual guide; the attention paid to the body
and the soul which the "care of the self" implies; exercises of abstinence;
examination of the conscience; the filtering of representations; and, finally,
the conversion toward and possession of the self. M. Foucault conceives of
these practices as "arts of existence" and "techniques of the self. "
I t i s quite true that, in this connection, the ancients did speak of an "art of
living." It seems to me, however, that the description M . Foucault gives of
what I had termed "spiritual exercises , " and which he prefers to call
"techniques of the self," is precisely focused far too much on the "self," or at
least on a specific conception of the self.
In particular, Foucault presents Greco-Roman ethics as an ethics of the
pleasure one takes in oneself: "Access to the self is liable to replace this kind
of violent, uncertain, and temporary pleasures with a form of pleasure one
takes in oneself, serenely and forever." To illustrate his point, Foucault cites
Seneca's twenty-third Letter, where he speaks of the joy one can find within
oneself, and specifically within the best portion of oneself. In fact, however,
I must say that there is a great deal of inexactitude in this way of
presenting the matter. In Letter 23, Seneca explicitly opposes voluptas
and gaudium - pleasure and joy - and one cannot, therefore, speak of
"another form of pleasure," as does Foucault (Care of the Self, p. 83)
when talking about joy. This is not just a quibble over words, although
the Stoics did attach a great deal of importance to words, and carefully
distinguished between hedone - "pleasure" - and eupatheia - "joy". No,
this is no mere question of vocabulary. If the Stoics insist on the word
gaudimn/ "joy," it is precisely because they refuse to introduce the principle
of pleasure into moral life. For them, happiness does not consist in pleasure,
but in virtue itself, which is its own reward. Long before Kant, the
Stoics strove jealously to preserve the purity of intention of the moral
consciousness.
Secondly and most importantly, it is not the case that the Stoic finds his
joy in his "self;" rather, as Seneca says, he finds it "in the best portion of the
self," in "the true good."  Joy is to be found "in the conscience turned
towards the good; in intentions which have no other object than virtue; in just
actions."  Joy can be found in what Seneca calls "perfect reason"  (that is to
say, in divine reason) since for him, human reason is nothing other than
reason capable of being made perfect. The "best portion of oneself," then, is,
in the last analysis, a transcendent self. Seneca does not find his joy in
"Seneca," but by transcending "Seneca"; by discovering that there is within
him - within all human beings, that is, and within the cosmos itself - a reason
which is a part of universal reason.
In fact, the goal of Stoic exercises is to go beyond the self, and think and
act in unison with universal reason. The three exercises described by Marcus
Aurelius, following Epictetus, are highly significant in this regard. As we saw
above, they are as follows:
1 to judge objectively, in accordance with inner reason;
2 to act in accordance with the reason which all human beings have in
common; and
3 to accept the destiny imposed u pon us by cosmic reason. For the Stoics,
there is only one single reason at work here, and this reason is man's true
self.
I can well understand Foucault's motives for giving short shrift to these
aspects, of which he was perfectly aware. His description of the practices of
the self - like, moreover, my description of spiritual exercises - is not merely
an historical study, but rather a tacit attempt to offer contemporary mankind
a model of life, which Foucault calls "an aesthetics of existence. " Now,
according to a more or less universal tendency of modern thought, which is
perhaps more instinctive than reflective, the ideas of "universal reason" and
"universal nature" do not have much meaning any more. It was therefore
convenient to "bracket" them.
For the moment, then, let us say that, from an historical point of view, it
seems difficult to accept that the philosophical practice of the Stoics and
Platonists was nothing but a relationship to one's self, a culture of the self, or
a pleasure taken in oneself. The psychic content of these exercises seems to
me to be something else entirely. In my view, the feeling of belonging to a
whole is an essential element: belonging, that is, both to the whole constituted
by the human community, and to that constituted by the cosmic whole.
Seneca sums it up in four words: Toti se inserens mundo, "Plunging oneself
into the totality of the world." In his adminble Anthropologie philosophique,
Groethuysen pointed out the importance o f this fundamental point. Such a
cosmic perspective radically transforms the feeling one has of oneself.
Oddly, Foucault does not have much to say about the Epicureans. This is
all the more surprising in that Epicurean ethics is, in a sense, an ethics
without norms. It is an autonomous ethics, for it cannot found itself upon
nature, which according to its views is the product of chance. It would seem,
therefore, to be an ethics perfectly suited to the modern mentality. Perhaps
the reason for this silence is to be found in the fact that it is rather difficult
to integrate Epicurean hedonism into the overall schema of the use of
pleasures proposed by M. Foucault. Be this as it may, the Epicureans did
make use of spiritual exercises, for instance the examination of conscience. As
we have said, however, these practices are not based on the norms of nature
or universal reason, because for the Epicureans the formation of the world is
the result of mere chance. Nevertheless, here again, this spiritual exercise
cannot be defined simply as culture of the self, a relationship of the self to
the self, or pleasure that can be found in one's own self. The Epicurean was
not afraid to admit that he needed other things besides himself in order to
satisfy his desires and to experience pleasure. He needed bodily nourishment
and the pleasures of love, but he also required a physical theory of the
universe, in order to eliminate the fear of the gods and of death. He needed
the company of the other members of the Epicurean school, so that he could
find happiness in mutual affection . Finally, he needed the imaginative
contemplation of an infinite number of universes in the infinite void, in order
to experience what Lucretius calls tlivi11a vo/uptt1s et lwm1r. Metrodorus, a
disciple of Epicurus, gives a good account of the Epicurean sage's immersion
in the cosmos: "Remember that, although born mortal with a limited
life-span, you have risen in thought as far as the eternity and infinity of
things, and that you have seen everything that has been, and everything that
shall be. " In Epicureanism, there is an extraordinary reversal of perspective.
Precisely because existence seems to the Epicurean to be pure chance,
inexorably unique, he greets life like a kind of miracle, a gratuitous,
unexpected gift of nature, and existence for him is a wonderful celebration.
Let us consider another example to illustrate the differences between our
interpretations of the "care of the self." In an interesting article entitled
"Ecriture de soi," M. Foucault took as his point of departure a remarkable
text concerning the therapeutic value of writing, which I had studied in
Exercices spirituels. According to this text, St Antony used to advise his
disciples to write down their actions and the emotions of their souls, as if they
were going to make them known to others . "Let writing take the place of the
eyes of other people," Antony used to say . This anecdote leads M. Foucault
to reflect on the various forms adopted in antiquity by what he calls the
"writing of the self." In particular, he examines the literary genre of
hypomnemata, which one could translate as "spiritual notebooks," in which
one writes down other people's thoughts, which may serve for the edification
of the person writing them down. Foucault describes the goal of this exercise
in the following terms: the point is to "capture what-has-already-been-said
[capter le deja-dit]," and to "collect what one may have heard or read, with a
view to nothing less than the constitution of the self." He then asks himself,
"How can we be placed in the presence of our selves with the help of ageless
discourses, picked up from any old place?" And he replies as follows: "this
exercise was supposed to allow one to turn back towards the past. The
contribution of the hypomnemata is one of the means by which one detaches
the soul from worries about the future, in o rder to inflect it toward meditation
on the past. " Both in Epicurean and in Stoic ethics, Foucault thinks he
perceives the refusal of a mental attitude d irected toward the future, and the
tendency to accord a positive value to the possession of a past which one can
enjoy autonomously and without worries.
It seems to me that this is a mistaken interpretation. It is true that the
Epicureans - and on{v the Epicureans - did consider the memory of pleasant
moments in the past as one of the principal sources of pleasure, but this has
nothing to do with the meditation on "what-has-already-been-said" practiced
in hypomnemala. Rather, as we saw above, Stoics and Epicureans had in
common an attitude which consisted in liberating oneself not only from
worries about the future, but also from the burden of the past, in order to
concentrate on the present moment; in order either to enjoy it, or to act
within it. From this point of view, neither the Stoics nor even the Epicureans
accorded a positive value to the past. The fundamental philosophic attitude
consisted in living in the present, and in possessing not the past, but the
present. That the Epicureans also attached a great deal of importance to the
thoughts formulated by their predecessors is a wholly different matter. But
although hypomnemata deal with what has already been said, they do not deal
with just anything "already said," the only merit of which would be that it is
a part of the past. Rather, it is because one recognizes in this "thing already
said" - which usually consisted in the dogmas of the school's founding
members - that which reason itself has to say to the present. It is because one
recognizes, in the dogmas of Epicurus or Chrysippus, an ever-present value,
precisely because they are the very expression of reason. In other words, when
one writes or notes something down, it is not an alien thought one is making
one's own. Rather, one is utilizing formulae considered as apt to actualize
what is already present within the reason of the person writing, and bring it
to life.
According to M. Foucault, this method made a deliberate attempt to be
eclectic, and therefore implied a personal choice; this then explains the
"constitution of the self."
Writing as a personal exercise, done by oneself and for oneself, is an art
of disparate truth; more precisely, it is a way of combining the
traditional authority of what has already been said, with the singularity
of the truth which asserts itself in it, and the particularity of the
circumstances which determine its utilization.
In fact, however, personal choice is not to be found in eclecticism, at least for
the Stoics and Epicureans. Eclecticism is only used for converting beginners.
At that stage, anything goes. For instance, Foucault finds an example of
eclecticism in the Letters to Lucilius, in which the Stoic Seneca quotes sayings
of Epicurus. The goal of these letters, however, is to convert Lucilius, and to
cause him to begin to lead a moral life. The utilization of Epicurus appears
only in the first Letters, and soon disappears. On the contrary, personal
choice in fact intervenes only when one adheres exclusively to a precise form
of life, be it Stoicism or Epicureanism, considered as in conformity with
reason. It is only in the New Academy - in the person of Cicero, for instance
- that a personal choice is made according to what reason considers as most
likely at a given moment.
It is thus not the case, as Foucault maintains, that the individual forges a
spiritual identity for himself by writing down and re-reading disparate
thoughts. In the first place, as we have seen, these thoughts are not d isparate,
but chosen because of their coherence. Secondly, and most importantly, the
point is not to forge oneself a spiritual identity by writing, but rather to
liberate onesel f from one's indi viduality, in order to raise oneself up to
u n i versal ity. It is thus incorrect to speak of "writing of the self": not only is
it not the case that one "writes oneself," but what is more, it is not the case
that writing constitutes the self. Writing, like the other spiritual exercises,
changes the level of the self. and universalizes it. The miracle of this exercise,
carried out in solitude, is that it allows its practitioner to accede to the
universality of reason within the confines of space and time.
For the monk Antony, the therapeutic value of writing consisted precisely
in its universalizing power. Writing, says Antony, takes the place of other
people's eyes. A person writing feels he is being watched; he is no longer
alone, but is a part of the silently present human community. When one
formulates one's personal acts in writing, one is taken up by the machinery
of reason, logic, and universality. What was confused and subjective becomes
thereby objective.
To summarize: what Foucault calls "practices of the self' do indeed
correspond, for the Platonists as well as for the Stoics, to a movement of
conversion toward the self. One frees oneself from exteriority, from personal
attachment to exterior objects, and from the pleasures they may provide. One
observes oneself, to determine whether one has made progress in this exercise.
One seeks to be one's own master, to possess oneself, and find one's happiness
in freedom and inner independence. I concur on all these points. I do think,
however, that this movement of interiorization is inseparably linked to another
movement, whereby one rises to a higher psychic level, at which one
encounters another kind of exteriorization, another relationship with "the
exterior." This is a new way of being-in-the-world, which consists in
becoming aware of oneself as a part of nature, and a portion of universal
reason. At this point, one no longer lives in the usual, conventional human
world, but in the world of nature. As we have seen above, one is then
practicing "physics" as a spiritual exercise.
In this way, one identifies oneself with an "Other": nature, or universal
reason, as it is present within each individual. This implies a radical
transformation of perspective, and contains a universalist, cosmic dimension,
upon which, it seems to me, M. Foucault did not sufficiently insist.
lnteriorization is a going beyond oneself; it is universalization.
The preceding remarks are not intended to be relevant only to an historical
analysis of ancient philosophy. They are also an attempt at defining an ethical
model which modern man can discover in antiquity . What I am afraid of is
that, by focusing his interpretation too exclusively on the culture of the self,
the care of the self, and conversion toward the self - more generally, by
defining his ethical model as an aesthetics of existence - M. Foucault is
propounding a culture of the self which is too aesthetic. In other words, this
may be a new form of Dandyism, late twentieth-century style. This, however,
deserves a more attentive study than I am able to devote to it here. Personally,
I bel ieve firmly - albeit perhaps naively - that it is possible for modern man
to l i ve, not as a sage (sophos) - most of the ancients did not hold this to be
possible but as a practitioner of t he ever-fragile exercise of wisdom. This can
be attempted, starting out from the lived experience of the concrete, living,
and perceiving subject, under the triple form defined, as we saw above, by
Marcus Aurelius:
1 as an effort to practice objectivity of judgment;
2 as an effort to live according to justice, in the service of the human
community; and
3 as an effort to become aware of our situation as a part of the universe. Such
an exercise of wisdom will thus be an attempt to render oneself open to the
universal.
More specifically, I think modern man can practice the spiritual exercises of
antiquity, at the same time separating them from the philosophical or mythic
discourse which came along with them. The same spiritual exercise can, in fact,
be justified by extremely diverse philosophical discourses. These latter are
nothing but clumsy attempts, coming after the fact, to describe and justify inner
experiences whose existential density is not, in the last analysis, susceptible of any
attempt at theorization or systematization. Stoics and Epicureans, for example -
for completely different reasons - urged their disciples to concentrate their
attention on the present moment, and free themselves from worries about the
future as well as the burden of the past Whoever concretely practices this
exercise, however, sees the universe with new eyes, as if he were seeing it for the
first time. In the enjoyment of the pure present, he discovers the mystery and
splendor of existence. At such moments, as Nietzsche said, we say yes "not only
to ourselves, but to all existence." It is therefore not necessary, in order to practice
these exercises, to believe in the Stoics' nature or universal reason. Rather, as one
practices them, one lives concretely according to reason. In the words of Marcus
Aurelius:"Although everything happens at random, don't you, too, act
at random." In this way, we can accede concretely to the universality of
the cosmic perspective, and the wonderful mystery of the presence of the
universe.
