eath is the cessation of the sensual impressions, of the impulses
of the passions, of the questionings of reason, and of the servitude
to the flesh.

It is shame and dishonour that, in any man's life, the soul should
faint from its duty while the body still holds out.

See to it that you fall not into Caesarism: avoid that stain, for
it may come to you. Guard your simplicity, your goodness, your
sincerity, your dignity, your reticence, your love of justice, your
piety, your kindliness, your affection for your kin, and your
constancy to your duty. Endeavour earnestly to continue such as
philosophy would make you. Reverence the Gods, and help mankind. Life
is short, and the one fruit of it in this world is a pure mind and
unselfish conduct. Be in all things the disciple of Antonine. Imitate
his resolute constancy to rational action, his level equability, his
godliness, his serenity of countenance, his sweetness of temper, his
contempt of vainglory, his keen attempts to comprehend things. Remember
how he never quitted any subject till he had thoroughly examined it
and understood it, and how he bore with those who blamed him unjustly,
without making any angry retort: how he was never in a hurry; how he
discouraged calumny; how closely he scanned the manners and actions of
men; how cautious he was in reproaching any man; how free from fear,
suspicion, or sophistry; how little contented him in the matter of
house, furniture, dress, food, servants; how patient he was of labour,
and how slow to anger. So abstemious was his life that he could hold
out until evening without relieving himself, except at the usual
hour. What a firm and loyal friend he was; how patient of frank
opposition to his opinions; how glad if any one could set him right!
How religious he was, and yet how free from superstition! Follow in
his steps that your last hour may find you with a conscience as easy
as his.

Sober yourself, recall your senses. Shake sleep from you, and know
that it was a dream that troubled you; and, now that you are broad
awake again, regard the waking world as you did the dream.

I am made up of a frail body and a soul. To the body all things
are indifferent, because it cannot distinguish them; and to the mind
all things are indifferent also which arise not from its own
activities. All these are indeed in its own power, but it is concerned
with only such of them as are present. Its past and future activities
are indifferent to it now.

 No toil for hand or foot is against Nature, so long as it is
proper for hand or foot to do. No more, then, is toil contrary to the
nature of man, as man, so long as he is doing work appointed for man
to do; and if it be not contrary to his nature it cannot be evil for
him.
 How many are the pleasures that have been enjoyed by robbers,
rakes, parricides, and tyrants!

 Do you not see how common artificers, though they may humour the
public to a certain extent, cling to the rules of their art, and
cannot endure to depart from them? Is it not grievous, then, that the
architect and the physician should shew greater respect for the rules
of their several professions, than man shews for his own reason, which
he possesses in common with the Gods?

36. Asia and Europe are mere corners of the Universe: the whole sea is
but a drop, Athos a clod. All the present is but an instant in
eternity. All things are small, changeable, and fleeting. Everything
proceeds from the universal intelligence, either directly or as a
consequence. Thus, the jaws of lions, poisons, all evil things such as
thorns or mire, are the consequences of the grand and the
beautiful. Do not, then, imagine that they are foreign to that which
you revere, but consider well the source of all things.

He who has seen the present has seen all that either has been from
all eternity, or will be to all eternity, for all things are alike in
kind and form.

Consider frequently the connexion of all things in the Universe,
and their relation to each other. All things are in a manner
intermingled with one another, and are, therefore, mutually
friendly. For one thing comes in due order after another, by virtue of
local movements, and of the harmony and unity of the whole.

Adapt yourself to the things which your destiny has given you:
love those with whom it is your lot to live, and love them with
sincere affection.

A tool, an instrument, a utensil, is in good case when it is fit
for its proper work: yet its maker remains not by it. But within the
organisms of Nature there remains and resides the power which made
them. You ought, therefore, to reverence this power the more,
believing that if you act in deference to its will, all will happen to
you in reason; for so in reason the Universe ranges all.
