I mean to inquire if, in the civil order, there can be any sure and
legitimate rule of administration, men being taken as they are and laws
as they might be. In this inquiry I shall endeavour always to unite
what right sanctions with what is prescribed by interest, in order that
justice and utility may in no case be divided.

I enter upon my task without proving the importance of the subject. I
shall be asked if I am a prince or a legislator, to write on politics.
I answer that I am neither, and that is why I do so. If I were a prince
or a legislator, I should not waste time in saying what wants doing; I
should do it, or hold my peace.

As I was born a citizen of a free State, and a member of the Sovereign,
I feel that, however feeble the influence my voice can have on public
affairs, the right of voting on them makes it my duty to study them:
and I am happy, when I reflect upon governments, to find my inquiries
always furnish me with new reasons for loving that of my own country.




CHAPTER I

SUBJECT OF THE FIRST BOOK


Man is born free; and everywhere he is in chains. One thinks himself
the master of others, and still remains a greater slave than they. How
did this change come about? I do not know. What can make it legitimate?
That question I think I can answer.

If I took into account only force, and the effects derived from it, I
should say: "As long as a people is compelled to obey, and obeys, it
does well; as soon as it can shake off the yoke, and shakes it off,
it does still better; for, regaining its liberty by the same right
as took it away, either it is justified in resuming it, or there was
no justification for those who took it away." But the social order is
a sacred right which is the basis of all other rights. Nevertheless,
this right does not come from nature, and must therefore be founded on
conventions. Before coming to that, I have to prove what I have just
asserted.





CHAPTER II

THE FIRST SOCIETIES


The most ancient of all societies, and the only one that is natural
is the family: and even so the children remain attached to the father
only so long as they need him for their preservation. As soon as this
need ceases, the natural bond is dissolved. The children, released from
the obedience they owed to the father, and the father, released from
the care he owed his children, return equally to independence. If they
remain united, they continue so no longer naturally, but voluntarily;
and the family itself is then maintained only by convention.

This common liberty results from the nature of man. His first law is
to provide for his own preservation, his first cares are those which
he owes to himself; and, as soon as he reaches years of discretion,
he is the sole judge of the proper means of preserving himself, and
consequently becomes his own master.

The family then may be called the first model of political societies:
the ruler corresponds to the father, and the people to the children;
and all, being born free and equal, alienate their liberty only for
their own advantage. The whole difference is that, in the family, the
love of the father for his children repays him for the care he takes of
them, while, in the State, the pleasure of commanding takes the place
of the love which the chief cannot have for the peoples under him.

Grotius denies that all human power is established in favour of the
governed, and quotes slavery as an example. His usual method of
reasoning is constantly to establish right by fact.[1] It would be
possible to employ a more logical method, but none could be more
favourable to tyrants.

It is then, according to Grotius, doubtful whether the human race
belongs to a hundred men, or that hundred men to the human race: and,
throughout his book, he seems to incline to the former alternative,
which is also the view of Hobbes. On this showing, the human species is
divided into so many herds of cattle, each with its ruler, who keeps
guard over them for the purpose of devouring them.

As a shepherd is of a nature superior to that of his flock, the
shepherds of men, _i.e._ their rulers, are of a nature superior to
that of the peoples under them. Thus, Philo tells us, the Emperor
Caligula reasoned, concluding equally well either that kings were gods,
or that men were beasts.

The reasoning of Caligula agrees with that of Hobbes and Grotius.
Aristotle, before any of them, had said that men are by no means equal
naturally, but that some are born for slavery, and others for dominion.

Aristotle was right; but he took the effect for the cause. Nothing
can be more certain than that every man born in slavery is born for
slavery. Slaves lose everything in their chains, even the desire of
escaping from them: they love their servitude, as the comrades of
Ulysses loved their brutish condition.[2] If then there are slaves by
nature, it is because there have been slaves against nature. Force made
the first slaves, and their cowardice perpetuated the condition.

I have said nothing of King Adam, or Emperor Noah, father of the three
great monarchs who shared out the universe, like the children of
Saturn, whom some scholars have recognised in them. I trust to getting
due thanks for my moderation; for, being a direct descendant of one
of these princes, perhaps of the eldest branch, how do I know that a
verification of titles might not leave me the legitimate king of the
human race? In any case, there can be no doubt that Adam was sovereign
of the world, as Robinson Crusoe was of his island, as long as he
was its only inhabitant; and this empire had the advantage that the
monarch, safe on his throne, had no rebellions, wars, or conspirators
to fear.


[1] "Learned inquiries into public right are often only the history of
past abuses; and troubling to study them too deeply is a profitless
infatuation" (_Essay on the Interests of France in Relation to its
Neighbours_, by the Marquis d'Argenson). This is exactly what Grotius
has done.

[2] See a short treatise of Plutarch's entitled "That Animals Reason."




CHAPTER III

THE RIGHT OF THE STRONGEST


The strongest is never strong enough to be always the master, unless
he transforms strength into right, and obedience into duty. Hence the
right of the strongest, which, though to all seeming meant ironically,
is really laid down as a fundamental principle. But are we never to
have an explanation of this phrase? Force is a physical power, and I
fail to see what moral effect it can have. To yield to force is an act
of necessity, not of will--at the most, an act of prudence. In what
sense can it be a duty?

Suppose for a moment that this so-called "right" exists. I maintain
that the sole result is a mass of inexplicable nonsense. For, if force
creates right, the effect changes with the cause: every force that
is greater than the first succeeds to its right. As soon as it is
possible to disobey with impunity, disobedience is legitimate; and, the
strongest being always in the right, the only thing that matters is
to act so as to become the strongest. But what kind of right is that
which perishes when force fails? If we must obey perforce, there is no
need to obey because we ought; and if we are not forced to obey, we are
under no obligation to do so. Clearly, the word "right" adds nothing to
force: in this connection, it means absolutely nothing.

Obey the powers that be. If this means yield to force, it is a good
precept, but superfluous: I can answer for its never being violated.
All power comes from God, I admit; but so does all sickness: does that
mean that we are forbidden to call in the doctor? A brigand surprises
me at the edge of a wood: must I not merely surrender my purse on
compulsion; but, even if I could withhold it, am I in conscience bound
to give it up? For certainly the pistol he holds is also a power.

Let us then admit that force does not create right, and that we are
obliged to obey only legitimate powers. In that case, my original
question recurs.




CHAPTER IV

SLAVERY


Since no man has a natural authority over his fellow, and force creates
no right, we must conclude that conventions form the basis of all
legitimate authority among men.

If an individual, says Grotius, can alienate his liberty and make
himself the slave of a master, why could not a whole people do the same
and make itself subject to a king? There are in this passage plenty
of ambiguous words which would need explaining; but let us confine
ourselves to the word _alienate_. To alienate is to give or to sell.
Now, a man who becomes the slave of another does not give himself; he
sells himself, at the least for his subsistence: but for what does a
people sell itself? A king is so far from furnishing his subjects with
their subsistence that he gets his own only from them; and, according
to Rabelais, kings do not live on nothing. Do subjects then give their
persons on condition that the king takes their goods also? I fail to
see what they have left to preserve.

It will be said that the despot assures his subjects civil
tranquillity. Granted; but what do they gain, if the wars his
ambition brings down upon them, his insatiable avidity, and the
vexatious conduct of his ministers press harder on them than their
own dissensions would have done? What do they gain, if the very
tranquillity they enjoy is one of their miseries? Tranquillity is found
also in dungeons; but is that enough to make them desirable places to
live in? The Greeks imprisoned in the cave of the Cyclops lived there
very tranquilly, while they were awaiting their turn to be devoured.

To say that a man gives himself gratuitously, is to say what is absurd
and inconceivable; such an act is null and illegitimate, from the mere
fact that he who does it is out of his mind. To say the same of a whole
people is to suppose a people of madmen; and madness creates no right.

Even if each man could alienate himself, he could not alienate his
children: they are born men and free; their liberty belongs to them,
and no one but they has the right to dispose of it. Before they come to
years of discretion, the father can, in their name, lay down conditions
for their preservation and well-being, but he cannot give them,
irrevocably and without conditions: such a gift is contrary to the ends
of nature, and exceeds the rights of paternity. It would therefore be
necessary, in order to legitimise an arbitrary government, that in
every generation the people should be in a position to accept or reject
it; but, were this so, the government would be no longer arbitrary.

To renounce liberty is to renounce being a man, to surrender the rights
of humanity and even its duties. For him who renounces everything no
indemnity is possible. Such a renunciation is incompatible with man's
nature; to remove all liberty from his will is to remove all morality
from his acts. Finally, it is an empty and contradictory convention
that sets up, on the one side, absolute authority, and, on the other,
unlimited obedience. Is it not clear that we can be under no obligation
to a person from whom we have the right to exact everything? Does not
this condition alone, in the absence of equivalence or exchange, in
itself involve the nullity of the act? For what right can my slave have
against me, when all that he has belongs to me, and, his right being
mine, this right of mine against myself is a phrase devoid of meaning?

Grotius and the rest find in war another origin for the so-called right
of slavery. The victor having, as they hold, the right of killing
the vanquished, the latter can buy back his life at the price of his
liberty; and this convention is the more legitimate because it is to
the advantage of both parties.

But it is clear that this supposed right to kill the conquered is by no
means deducible from the state of war. Men, from the mere fact that,
while they are living in their primitive independence, they have no
mutual relations stable enough to constitute either the state of peace
or the state of war, cannot be naturally enemies. War is constituted by
a relation between things, and not between persons; and, as the state
of war cannot arise out of simple personal relations, but only out of
real relations, private war, or war of man with man, can exist neither
in the state of nature, where there is no constant property, nor in the
social state, where everything is under the authority of the laws.

Individual combats, duels and encounters, are acts which cannot
constitute a state; while the private wars, authorised by the
Establishments of Louis IX, King of France, and suspended by the Peace
of God, are abuses of feudalism, in itself an absurd system if ever
there was one, and contrary to the principles of natural right and to
all good polity.

War then is a relation, not between man and man, but between State and
State, and individuals are enemies only accidentally, not as men, nor
even as citizens,[1] but as soldiers; not as members of their country,
but as its defenders. Finally, each State can have for enemies only
other States, and not men; for between things disparate in nature there
can be no real relation.

Furthermore, this principle is in conformity with the established
rules of all times and the constant practice of all civilised peoples.
Declarations of war are intimations less to powers than to their
subjects. The foreigner, whether king, individual, or people, who robs,
kills or detains the subjects, without declaring war on the prince,
is not an enemy, but a brigand. Even in real war, a just prince,
while laying hands, in the enemy's country, on all that belongs to
the public, respects the lives and goods of individuals: he respects
rights on which his own are founded. The object of the war being the
destruction of the hostile State, the other side has a right to kill
its defenders, while they are bearing arms; but as soon as they lay
them down and surrender, they cease to be enemies or instruments of the
enemy, and become once more merely men, whose life no one has any right
to take. Sometimes it is possible to kill the State without killing
a single one of its members; and war gives no right which is not
necessary to the gaining of its object. These principles are not those
of Grotius: they are not based on the authority of poets, but derived
from the nature of reality and based on reason.

The right of conquest has no foundation other than the right of the
strongest. If war does not give the conqueror the right to massacre the
conquered peoples, the right to enslave them cannot be based upon a
right which does not exist No one has a right to kill an enemy except
when he cannot make him a slave, and the right to enslave him cannot
therefore be derived from the right to kill him. It is accordingly an
unfair exchange to make him buy at the price of his liberty his life,
over which the victor holds no right. Is it not clear that there is a
vicious circle in founding the right of life and death on the right of
slavery, and the right of slavery on the right of life and death?

Even if we assume this terrible right to kill everybody, I maintain
that a slave made in war, or a conquered people, is under no obligation
to a master, except to obey him as far as he is compelled to do so.
By taking an equivalent for his life, the victor has not done him
a favour; instead of killing him without profit, he has killed him
usefully. So far then is he from acquiring over him any authority in
addition to that of force, that the state of war continues to subsist
between them: their mutual relation is the effect of it, and the usage
of the right of war does not imply a treaty of peace. A convention has
indeed been made; but this convention, so far from destroying the state
of war, presupposes its continuance.

So, from whatever aspect we regard the question, the right of slavery
is null and void, not only as being illegitimate, but also because it
is absurd and meaningless. The words _slave_ and _right_ contradict
each other, and are mutually exclusive. It will always be equally
foolish for a man to say to a man or to a people: "I make with you a
convention wholly at your expense and wholly to my advantage; I shall
keep it as long as I like, and you will keep it as long as I like."


[1] The Romans, who understood and respected the right of war more
than any other nation on earth, carried their scruples on this head
so far that a citizen was not allowed to serve as a volunteer without
engaging himself expressly against the enemy, and against such and
such an enemy by name. A legion in which the younger Cato was seeing
his first service under Popilius having been reconstructed, the elder
Cato wrote to Popilius that, if he wished his son to continue serving
under him, he must administer to him a new military oath, because, the
first having been annulled, he was no longer able to bear arms against
the enemy. The same Cato wrote to his son telling him to take great
care not to go into battle before taking this new oath. I know that the
siege of Clusium and other isolated events can be quoted against me;
but I am citing laws and customs. The Romans are the people that least
often transgressed its laws; and no other people has had such good ones.



CHAPTER V

THAT WE MUST ALWAYS GO BACK TO A FIRST CONVENTION


Even if I granted all that I have been refuting, the friends of
despotism would be no better off. There will always be a great
difference between subduing a multitude and ruling a society. Even if
scattered individuals were successively enslaved by one man, however
numerous they might be, I still see no more than a master and his
slaves, and certainly not a people and its ruler; I see what may be
termed an aggregation, but not an association; there is as yet neither
public good nor body politic. The man in question, even if he has
enslaved half the world, is still only an individual; his interest,
apart from that of others, is still a purely private interest. If this
same man comes to die, his empire, after him, remains scattered and
without unity, as an oak falls and dissolves into a heap of ashes when
the fire has consumed it.

A people, says Grotius, can give itself to a king. Then, according
to Grotius, a people is a people before it gives itself. The gift
is itself a civil act, and implies public deliberation. It would be
better, before examining the act by which a people gives itself to a
king, to examine that by which it has become a people; for this act,
being necessarily prior to the other, is the true foundation of society.

Indeed, if there were no prior convention, where, unless the election
were unanimous, would be the obligation on the minority to submit
to the choice of the majority? How have a hundred men who wish for
a master the right to vote on behalf of ten who do not? The law of
majority voting is itself something established by convention, and
presupposes unanimity, on one occasion at least.




CHAPTER VI

THE SOCIAL COMPACT


I suppose men to have reached the point at which the obstacles in the
way of their preservation in the state of nature show their power of
resistance to be greater than the resources at the disposal of each
individual for his maintenance in that state. That primitive condition
can then subsist no longer; and the human race would perish unless it
changed its manner of existence.

But, as men cannot engender new forces, but only unite and direct
existing ones, they have no other means of preserving themselves than
the formation, by aggregation, of a sum of forces great enough to
overcome the resistance. These they have to bring into play by means of
a single motive power, and cause to act in concert.

This sum of forces can arise only where several persons come together:
but, as the force and liberty of each man are the chief instruments of
his self-preservation, how can he pledge them without harming his own
interests, and neglecting the care he owes to himself? This difficulty,
in its bearing on my present subject, may be stated in the following
terms--

"The problem is to find a form of association which will defend and
protect with the whole common force the person and goods of each
associate, and in which each, while uniting himself with all, may
still obey himself alone, and remain as free as before." This is
the fundamental problem of which the _Social Contract_ provides the
solution.

The clauses of this contract are so determined by the nature of the act
that the slightest modification would make them vain and ineffective;
so that, although they have perhaps never been formally set forth,
they are everywhere the same and everywhere tacitly admitted and
recognised, until, on the violation of the social compact, each regains
his original rights and resumes his natural liberty, while losing the
conventional liberty in favour of which he renounced it.

These clauses, properly understood, may be reduced to one--the total
alienation of each associate, together with all his rights, to the
whole community for, in the first place, as each gives himself
absolutely, the conditions are the same for all; and, this being so, no
one has any interest in making them burdensome to others.

Moreover, the alienation being without reserve, the union is as perfect
as it can be, and no associate has anything more to demand: for, if
the individuals retained certain rights, as there would be no common
superior to decide between them and the public, each, being on one
point his own judge, would ask to be so on all; the state of nature
would thus continue, and the association would necessarily become
inoperative or tyrannical.

Finally, each man, in giving himself to all, gives himself to nobody;
and as there is no associate over whom he does not acquire the same
right as he yields others over himself, he gains an equivalent for
everything he loses, and an increase of force for the preservation of
what he has.

If then we discard from the social compact what is not of its essence,
we shall find that it reduces itself to the following terms--

_"Each of us puts his person and all his power in common under the
supreme direction of the general will, and, in our corporate capacity,
we receive each member as an indivisible part of the whole._"

At once, in place of the individual personality of each contracting
party, this act of association creates a moral and collective body,
composed of as many members as the assembly contains votes, and
receiving from this act its unity, its common identity, its life and
its will. This public person, so formed by the union of all other
persons, formerly took the name of _city_,[1] and now takes that of
_Republic_ or _body politic_; it is called by its members _State_ when
passive, _Sovereign_ when active, and _Power_ when compared with others
like itself. Those who are associated in it take collectively the name
of _people_, and severally are called _citizens_, as sharing in the
sovereign power, and _subjects_, as being under the laws of the State.
But these terms are often confused and taken one for another: it is
enough to know how to distinguish them when they are being used with
precision.


[1] The real meaning of this word has been almost wholly lost in
modern times; most people mistake a town for a city, and a townsman
for a citizen. They do not know that houses make a town, but citizens
a city. The same mistake long ago cost the Carthaginians dear. I
have never read of the title of citizens being given to the subjects
of any prince, not even the ancient Macedonians or the English of
to-day, though they are nearer liberty than any one else. The French
alone everywhere familiarly adopt the name of citizens, because,
as can be seen from their dictionaries, they have no idea of its
meaning; otherwise they would be guilty in usurping it, of the crime
of _lèse-majesté_: among them, the name expresses a virtue, and not
a right. When Bodin spoke of our citizens and townsmen, he fell into
a bad blunder in taking the one class for the other. M. d'Alembert
has avoided the error, and, in his article on Geneva, has clearly
distinguished the four orders of men (or even five, counting mere
foreigners) who dwell in our town, of which two only compose the
Republic. No other French writer, to my knowledge, has understood the
real meaning of the word citizen.




CHAPTER VII

THE SOVEREIGN


This formula shows us that the act of association comprises a mutual
undertaking between the public and the individuals, and that each
individual, in making a contract, as we may say, with himself, is bound
in a double capacity; as a member of the Sovereign he is bound to the
individuals, and as a member of the State to the Sovereign. But the
maxim of civil right, that no one is bound by undertakings made to
himself, does not apply in this case; for there is a great difference
between incurring an obligation to yourself and incurring one to a
whole of which you form a part.

Attention must further be called to the fact that public deliberation,
while competent to bind all the subjects to the Sovereign, because of
the two different capacities in which each of them may be regarded,
cannot, for the opposite reason, bind the Sovereign to itself; and
that it is consequently against the nature of the body politic for the
Sovereign to impose on itself a law which it cannot infringe. Being
able to regard itself in only one capacity, it is in the position of an
individual who makes a contract with himself; and this makes it clear
that there neither is nor can be any kind of fundamental law binding
on the body of the people--not even the social contract itself. This
does not mean that the body politic cannot enter into undertakings with
others, provided the contract is not infringed by them; for in relation
to what is external to it, it becomes a simple being, an individual.

But the body politic or the Sovereign, drawing its being wholly from
the sanctity of the contract, can never bind itself, even to an
outsider, to do anything derogatory to the original act, for instance,
to alienate any part of itself, or to submit to another Sovereign.
Violation of the act by which it exists would be self-annihilation; and
that which is itself nothing can create nothing.

As soon as this multitude is so united in one body, it is impossible to
offend against one of the members without attacking the body, and still
more to offend against the body without the members resenting it. Duty
and interest therefore equally oblige the two contracting parties to
give each other help; and the same men should seek to combine, in their
double capacity, all the advantages dependent upon that capacity.

Again, the Sovereign, being formed wholly of the individuals who
compose it, neither has nor can have any interest contrary to theirs;
and consequently the sovereign power need give no guarantee to its
subjects, because it is impossible for the body to wish to hurt all
its members. We shall also see later on that It cannot hurt any in
particular. The Sovereign, merely by virtue of what it is, is is always
what it should be.

This, however, is not the case with the relation of the subjects to the
Sovereign, which, despite the common interest, would have no security
that they would fulfil their undertakings, unless it found means to
assure itself of their fidelity.

In fact, each individual, as a man, may have a particular will
contrary or dissimilar to the general will which he has as a citizen.
His particular interest may speak to him quite differently from the
common interest: his absolute and naturally independent existence may
make him look upon what he owes to the common cause as a gratuitous
contribution, the loss of which will do less harm to others than the
payment of it is burdensome to himself; and, regarding the moral person
which constitutes the State as a persona ficta, because not a man, he
may wish to enjoy the rights of citizenship without being ready to
fulfil the duties of a subject. The continuance of such an injustice
could not but prove the undoing of the body politic.

In order then that the social compact may not be an empty formula, it
tacitly includes the undertaking, which alone can give force to the
rest, that whoever refuses to obey the general will shall be compelled
to do so by the whole body. This means nothing less than that he will
be forced to be free; for this is the condition which, by giving each
citizen to his country, secures him against all personal dependence. In
this lies the key to the working of the political machine; this alone
legitimizes civil undertakings, which, without it, would be absurd,
tyrannical, and liable to the most frightful abuses.




CHAPTER VIII

THE CIVIL STATE


The passage from the state of nature to the civil state produces a very
remarkable change in man, by substituting justice, for instinct in his
conduct, and giving his actions the morality they had formerly lacked.
Then only, when the voice of duty takes the place of physical impulses
and right of appetite, does _man_, who so far had considered only
himself, find that he is forced to act on different principles, and
to consult his reason before listening to his inclinations. Although,
in this state, he deprives himself of some advantages which he got
from nature, he gains in return others so great, his faculties are
so stimulated and developed, his ideas so extended, his feelings so
ennobled, and his whole soul so uplifted, that, did not the abuses of
this new condition often degrade him below that which he left, he would
be bound to bless continually the happy moment which took him from it
for ever, and, instead of a stupid and unimaginative animal, made him
an intelligent being and a man.

Let us draw up the whole account in terms easily commensurable.
What man loses by the social contract in his natural liberty and
an unlimited right to everything he tries to get and succeeds in
getting; what he gains is civil liberty and the proprietorship of all
he possesses. If we are to avoid mistake in weighing one against the
other, we must clearly distinguish natural liberty, which is bounded
only by the strength of the individual, from civil liberty, which is
limited by the general will; and possession, which is merely the effect
of force or the right of the first occupier, from property, which can
be founded only on a positive title.

We might, over and above all this, add, to what man acquires in the
civil state, moral liberty, which alone makes him truly master of
himself; for the mere impulse of appetite is slavery, while obedience
to a law which we prescribe to ourselves is liberty. But I have already
said too much on this head, and the philosophical meaning of the word
liberty does not now concern us.




CHAPTER IX

REAL PROPERTY


Each member of the community gives himself to it, at the moment of
its foundation, just as he is, with all the resources at his command,
including the goods he possesses. This act does not make possession, in
changing hands, change its nature, and becomes property in the hands
of the Sovereign; but, as the forces of the city are incomparably
greater than those of an individual, public possession is also, in
fact, stronger and more irrevocable, without being any more legitimate,
at any rate from the point of view of foreigners. For the State, in
relation to its members, is master of all their goods by the social
contract, which, within the State, is the basis of all rights; but,
in relation to other powers, it is so only by the right of the first
occupier, which it holds from its members.

The right of the first occupier, though more real than the right of the
strongest, becomes a real right only when the right of property has
already been established. Every man has naturally a right to everything
he needs; but the positive act which makes him proprietor of one thing
excludes him from everything else. Having his share, he ought to keep
to it, and can have no further right against the community. This is why
the right of the first occupier, which in the state of nature is so
weak, claims the respect of every man in civil society. In this right
we are respecting not so much what belongs to another as what does not
belong to ourselves.

In general, to establish the right of the first occupier over a plot of
ground, the following conditions are necessary: first, the land must
not yet be inhabited; secondly, a man must occupy only the amount he
needs for his subsistence; and, in the third place, possession must be
taken, not by an empty ceremony, but by labour and cultivation, the
only sign of proprietorship that should be respected by others, in
default of a legal title.

In granting the right of first occupancy to necessity and labour,
are we not really stretching it as far as it can go? Is it possible
to leave such a right unlimited? Is it to be enough to set foot on a
plot of common ground, in order to be able to call yourself at once
the master of it? Is it to be enough that a man has the strength to
expel others for a moment, in order to establish his right to prevent
them from ever returning? How can a man or a people seize an immense
territory and keep it from the rest of the world except by a punishable
usurpation, since all others are being robbed, by such an act, of
the place of habitation and the means of subsistence which nature
gave them in common? When Nuñez Balbao, standing on the sea-shore,
took possession of the South Seas and the whole of South America in
the name of the crown of Castille, was that enough to dispossess all
their actual inhabitants, and to shut out from them all the princes of
the world? On such a showing, these ceremonies are idly multiplied,
and the Catholic King need only take possession all at once, from
his apartment, of the whole universe, merely making a subsequent
reservation about what was already in the possession of other princes.

We can imagine how the lands of individuals, where they were contiguous
and came to be united, became the public territory, and how the right
of Sovereignty, extending from the subjects over the lands they held,
became at once real and personal. The possessors were thus made more
dependent, and the forces at their command used to guarantee their
fidelity. The advantage of this does not seem to have been felt
by ancient monarchs, who called themselves King of the Persians,
Scythians, or Macedonians, and seemed to regard themselves more as
rulers of men than as masters of a country. Those of the present
day more cleverly call themselves Kings of France, Spain, England,
etc.: thus holding the land, they are quite confident of holding the
inhabitants.

The peculiar fact about this alienation is that, in taking over the
goods of individuals, the community, so far from despoiling them, only
assures them legitimate possession, and changes usurpation into a true
right and enjoyment into proprietorship. Thus the possessors, being
regarded as depositaries of the public good, and having their rights,
respected by all the members of the State and maintained against
foreign aggression by all its forces, have, by a cession which benefits
both the public and still more themselves, acquired, so to speak,
all that they gave up. This paradox may easily be explained by the
distinction between the rights which the Sovereign and the proprietor
have over the same estate, as we shall see later on. It may also happen
that men begin to unite one with another before they possess anything,
and that, subsequently occupying a tract of country which is enough for
all, they enjoy it in common, or share it out among themselves, either
equally or according to a scale fixed by they Sovereign. However the
acquisition be made, the right which each individual has to his own
estate is always subordinate to the right which the community has over
all: without this, there would be neither stability in the social tie,
nor real force in the exercise of Sovereignty.

I shall end this chapter and this book by remarking on a fact on
which the whole social system should rest: _i.e._ that, instead of
destroying natural inequality, the fundamental compact substitutes,
for such physical inequality as nature may have set up between men, an
equality that is moral and legitimate, and that men, who may be unequal
in strength or intelligence, become every one equal by convention and
legal right.[1]




BOOK II


CHAPTER I

THAT SOVEREIGNTY IS INALIENABLE


The first and most important deduction from the principles we have
so far laid down is that the general will alone can direct the State
according to the object for which it was instituted, _i.e._ the
common good: for if the clashing of particular interests made the
establishment of societies necessary, the agreement of these very
interests made it possible. The common element in these different
interests is what forms the social tie; and, were there no point of
agreement between them all, no society could exist. It is solely on the
basis of this common interest that every society should be governed.

I hold then that Sovereignty, being nothing less than the exercise of
the general will, can never be alienated, and that the Sovereign, who
is no less than a collective being, cannot be represented except by
himself: the power indeed may be transmitted, but not the will.

In reality, if it is not impossible for a particular will to agree on
some point with the general will, it is at least impossible for the
agreement to be lasting and constant; for the particular will tends,
by its very nature, to partiality, while the general will tends to
equality. It is even more impossible to have any guarantee of this
agreement; for even if it should always exist, it would be the effect
not of art, but of chance. The Sovereign may indeed say: "I now will
actually what this man wills, or at least what he says he wills"; but
it cannot say: "What he wills tomorrow, I too shall will" because it is
absurd for the will to bind itself for the future, nor is it incumbent
on any will to consent to anything that is not for the good of the
being who wills. If then the people promises simply to obey, by that
very act it dissolves itself and loses what makes it a people; the
moment a master exists, there is no longer a Sovereign, and from that
moment the body politic has ceased to exist.

This does not mean that the commands of the rulers cannot pass for
general wills, so long as the Sovereign, being free to oppose them,
offers no opposition. In such a case, universal silence is taken to
imply the consent of the people. This will be explained later on.


[1] Under bad governments, this equality is only apparent and illusory:
it serves only to keep the pauper in his poverty and the rich man in
the position he has usurped. In fact, laws are always of use to those
who possess and harmful to those who have nothing: from which it
follows that the social state is advantageous to men only when all have
something and none too much.



CHAPTER II

THAT SOVEREIGNTY IS INDIVISIBLE


Sovereignty, for the same reason as makes it inalienable, is
indivisible; for will either is, or is not, general;[1] it is the
will either of the body of the people, or only of a part of it. In
the first case, the will, when declared, is an act of Sovereignty and
constitutes law: in the second, it is merely a particular will, or act
of magistracy--at the most a decree.

But our political theorists, unable to divide Sovereignty in
principle, divide it according to its object: into force and will;
into legislative power and executive power; into rights of taxation,
justice and war; into internal administration and power of foreign
treaty. Sometimes they confuse all these sections, and sometimes they
distinguish them; they turn the Sovereign into a fantastic being
composed of several connected pieces: it is as if they were making man
of several bodies, one with eyes, one with arms, another with feet,
and each with nothing besides. We are told that the jugglers of Japan
dismember a child before the eyes of the spectators; then they throw
all the members into the air one after another, and the child falls
down alive and whole. The conjuring tricks of our political theorists
are very like that; they first dismember the body politic by an
illusion worthy of a fair, and then join it together again we know not
how.

This error is due to a lack of exact notions concerning the Sovereign
authority, and to taking for parts of it what are only emanations from
it. Thus, for example, the acts of declaring war and making peace have
been regarded as acts of Sovereignty; but this is not the case, as
these acts do not constitute law, but merely the application of a law,
a particular act which decides how the law applies, as we shall see
clearly when the idea attached to the word _law_ has been defined.

If we examined the other divisions in the same manner, we should find
that, whenever Sovereignty seems to be divided, there is an illusion:
the rights which are taken as being part of Sovereignty are really all
subordinate, and always imply supreme wills of which they only sanction
the execution.

It would be impossible to estimate the obscurity this lack of exactness
has thrown over the decisions of writers who have dealt with political
right, when they have used the principles laid down by them to pass
judgment on the respective rights of kings and peoples. Every one can
see, in Chapters III and IV of the First Book of Grotius, how the
learned man and his translator, Barbeyrac, entangle and tie themselves
up in their own sophistries, for fear of saying too little or too
much of what they think, and so offending the interests they have to
conciliate. Grotius, a refugee in France, ill-content with his own
country, and desirous of paying his court to Louis XIII, to whom his
book is dedicated, spares no pains to rob the peoples of all their
rights and invest kings with them by every conceivable artifice. This
would also have been much to the taste of Barbeyrac, who dedicated his
translation to George I of England. But unfortunately the expulsion
of James II, which he called his "abdication," compelled him to use
all reserve, to shuffle and to tergiversate, in order to avoid making
William out a usurper. If these two writers had adopted the true
principles, all difficulties would have been removed, and they would
have been always consistent; but it would have been a sad truth for
them to tell, and would have paid court for them to no-one save the
people. Moreover, truth is no road to fortune, and the people dispenses
neither ambassadorships, nor professorships, nor pensions.


[1] To be general, a will need not always be unanimous; but every
vote--must be counted: any exclusion is a breach of generality.




CHAPTER III

WHETHER THE GENERAL WILL IS FALLIBLE


It follows from what has gone before that the general will is always
right and tends to the public advantage; but it does not follow that
the deliberations of the people are always equally correct. Our will
is always for our own good, but we do not always see what that is;
the people is never corrupted, but it is often deceived, and on such
occasions only does it seem to will what is bad.

There is often a great deal of difference between the will of all and
the general will; the latter considers only the common interest, while
the former takes private interest into account, and is no more than a
sum of particular wills: but take away from these same wills the pluses
and minuses that cancel one another,[1] and the general will remains as
the sum of the differences.

If, when the people, being furnished with adequate information, held
its deliberations, the citizens had no communication one with another,
the grand total of the small differences would always give the general
will, and the decision would always be good. But when factions arise,
and partial associations are formed at the expense of the great
association, the will of each of these associations becomes general
in relation to its members, while it remains particular in relation
to the State: it may then be said that there are no longer as many
votes as there are men, but only as many as there are associations.
The differences become less numerous and give a less general result.
Lastly, when one of these associations is so great as to prevail over
all the rest, the result is no longer a sum of small differences, but a
single difference; in this case there is no longer a general will, and
the opinion which prevails is purely particular.

It is therefore essential, if the general will is to be able to express
itself, that there should be no partial society within the State,
and that each citizen should think only his own thoughts:[2] which
was indeed the sublime and unique system established by the great
Lycurgus. But if there are partial societies, it is best to have as
many as possible and to prevent them from being unequal, as was done by
Solon, Numa and Servius. These precautions are the only ones that can
guarantee that the general will shall be always enlightened, and that
the people shall in no way deceive itself.


[1] "Every interest," says the Marquis d'Argenson, "has different
principles. The agreement of two particular interests is formed by
opposition to a third." He might have added that the agreement of all
interests is formed by opposition to that of each. If there were no
different interests, the common interest would be barely felt, as it
would encounter no obstacle; all would go on of its own accord, and
politics would cease to be an art.

[2] "In fact," says Macchiavelli, "there are some divisions that are
harmful to a Republic and some that are advantageous. Those which
stir up sects and parties are harmful; those attended by neither are
advantageous. Since, then, the founder of a Republic cannot help
enmities arising, he ought at least to prevent them from growing into
sects" (_History of Florence,_ Book vii). Rousseau quotes the Italian.




CHAPTER IV

THE LIMITS OF THE SOVEREIGN POWER


If the State is a moral person whose life is in the union of its
members, and if the most important of its cares is the care for its
own preservation, it must have a universal and compelling force, in
order to move and dispose each part as may be most advantageous to the
whole. As nature gives each man absolute power over all his members,
the social compact gives the body politic absolute power over all its
members also; and it is this power which, under the direction of the
general will, bears, as I have said, the name of Sovereignty.

But, besides the public person, we have to consider the private persons
composing it, whose life and liberty are naturally independent of it.
We are bound then to distinguish clearly between the respective rights
of the citizens and the Sovereign,[1] and between the duties the former
have to fulfil as subjects, and the natural rights they should enjoy as
men.

Each man alienates, I admit, by the social compact, only such part of
his powers, goods and liberty as it is important for the community to
control; but it must also be granted that the Sovereign is sole judge
of what is important.

Every service a citizen can render the State he ought to render as soon
as the Sovereign demands it; but the Sovereign, for its part, cannot
impose upon its subjects any fetters that are useless to the community,
nor can it even wish to do so; for no more by the law of reason than by
the law of nature can anything occur without a cause.

The undertakings which bind us to the social body are obligatory only
because they are mutual; and their nature is such that in fulfilling
them we cannot work for others without working for ourselves. Why is it
that the general will is always in the right, and that all continually
will the happiness of each one, unless it is because there is not a
man who does not think of "each" as meaning him, and consider himself
in voting for all? This proves that equality of rights and the idea
of justice which such equality creates originate in the preference
each man gives to himself, and accordingly in the very nature of man.
It proves that the general will, to be really such, must be general
in its object as well as its essence; that it must both come from all
and apply to all; and that it loses its natural rectitude when it is
directed to some particular and determinate object, because in such
a case we are judging of something foreign to us, and have no true
principle of equity to guide us.

Indeed, as soon as a question of particular fact or right arises on
a point not previously regulated by a general convention, the matter
becomes contentious. It is a case in which the individuals concerned
are one party, and the public the other, but in which I can see neither
the law that ought to be followed nor the judge who ought to give the
decision. In such a case, it would be absurd to propose to refer the
question to an express decision of the general will, which can be
only the conclusion reached by one of the parties and in consequence
will be, for the other party, merely an external and particular will,
inclined on this occasion to injustice and subject to error. Thus, just
as a particular will cannot stand for the general will, the general
will, in turn, changes its nature, when its object is particular, and,
as general, cannot pronounce on a man or a fact. When, for instance,
the people of Athens nominated or displaced its rulers, decreed
honours to one, and imposed penalties on another, and, by a multitude
of particular decrees, exercised all the functions of government
indiscriminately, it had in such cases no longer a general will in the
strict sense; it was acting no longer as Sovereign, but as magistrate.
This will seem contrary to current views; but I must be given time to
expound my own.

It should be seen from the foregoing that what makes the will general
is less the number of voters than the common interest uniting them;
for under this system, each necessarily submits to the conditions he
imposes on others; and this admirable agreement between interest and
justice gives to the common deliberations an equitable character which
at once vanishes when any particular question is discussed, in the
absence of a common interest to unite and identify the ruling of the
judge with that of the party.

From whatever side we approach our principle, we reach the same
conclusion, that the social compact sets up among the citizens an
equality of such a kind, that they all bind themselves to observe the
same conditions and should therefore all enjoy the same rights. Thus,
from the very nature of the compact, every "act of Sovereignty", _i.e._
every authentic act of the general will, binds or favours all the
citizens equally; so that the Sovereign recognises only the body of the
nation, and draws no distinctions between those of whom it is made up.
What, then, strictly speaking is an act of Sovereignty? It is not a
convention between a superior and an inferior, but a convention between
the body and each of its members. It is legitimate, because based on
the social contract, and, equitable, because common to all; useful,
because it can have no other object than the general good, and stable,
because guaranteed by the public force and the supreme power. So long
as the subjects have to submit only to conventions of this sort, they
obey no-one but their own will; and to ask how far the respective
rights of the Sovereign and the citizens extend, is to ask up to what
point the latter can enter into undertakings with themselves, each with
all, and all with each.

We can see from this that the sovereign power, absolute, sacred and
inviolable as it is, does not and cannot exceed the limits of general
conventions, and that every man may dispose at will of such goods and
liberty as these conventions leave him; so that the Sovereign never has
a right to lay more charges on one subject than on another, because, in
that case, the question becomes particular, and ceases to be within its
competency.

When these distinctions have once been admitted, it is seen to be so
untrue that there is, in the social contract, any real renunciation
on the part of the individuals, that the position in which they find
themselves as a result of the contract is really preferable to that in
which they were before. Instead of a renunciation, they have made an
advantageous exchange: instead of an uncertain and precarious way of
living they have got one that is better and more secure; instead of
natural independence they have got liberty, instead of the power to
harm others security for themselves, and instead of their strength,
which others might overcome, a right which social union makes
invincible. Their very life, which they have devoted to the State,
is by it constantly protected; and when they risk it in the State's
defence, what more are they doing than giving back what they have
received from it? What are they doing that they would not do more often
and with greater danger in the state of nature, in which they would
inevitably have to fight battles at the peril of their lives in defence
of that which is the means of their preservation? All have indeed to
fight when their country needs them; but then no one has ever to fight
for himself. Do we not gain something by running, on behalf of what
gives us our security, only some of the risks we should have to run for
ourselves, as soon as we lost it?


[1] Attentive readers, do not, I pray, be in a hurry to charge me with
contradicting myself. The terminology made it unavoidable, considering
the poverty of the language; but wait and see.




CHAPTER V

THE RIGHT OF LIFE AND DEATH


The question is often asked how individuals, having no right to dispose
of their own lives, can transfer to the Sovereign a right which they
do not possess. The difficulty of answering this question seems to me
to lie in its being wrongly stated. Every man has a right to risk his
own life in order to preserve it. Has it ever, been said that a man
who throws himself out of the window to escape from a fire is guilty
of suicide? Has such a crime ever been laid to the charge of him who
perishes in a storm because, when he went on board, he knew of the
danger?

The social treaty has for its end the preservation of the contracting
parties. He who wills the end wills the means also, and the means must
involve some risks, and even some losses. He who wishes to preserve
his life at others expense should also, when it is necessary, be
ready to give it up for their sake. Furthermore, the citizen is no
longer the judge of the dangers to which the law desires him to expose
himself; and when the prince says to him: "It is expedient for the
State that you should die," he ought to die, because it is only on that
condition that he has been living in security up to the present, and
because his life is no longer a mere bounty of nature, but a gift made
conditionally by the State.

The death-penalty inflicted upon criminals may be looked on in much the
same light: it is in order that we may not fall victims to an assassin
that we consent to die if we ourselves turn assassins. In this treaty,
so far from disposing of our own lives, we think only of securing
them, and it is not to be assumed that any of the parties then expects
to get hanged.

Again, every malefactor, by attacking social rights, becomes on forfeit
a rebel and a traitor to his country; by violating its laws he ceases
to be a member of it; he even makes war upon it. In such a case the
preservation of the State is inconsistent with his own, and one or the
other must perish; in putting the guilty to death, we slay not so much
the citizen as an enemy. The trial and the judgment are the proofs
that he has broken the social treaty, and is in consequence no longer
a member of the State. Since, then, he has recognised himself to be
such by living there, he must be removed by exile as a violator of the
compact, or by death as a public enemy; for such an enemy is not a
moral person, but merely a man; and in such a case the right of war is
to kill the vanquished.

But, it will be said, the condemnation of a criminal is a particular
act. I admit it: but such condemnation is not a function of the
Sovereign; it is a right the Sovereign can confer without being able
itself to exert it. All my ideas are consistent, but I cannot expound
them all at once.

We may add that frequent punishments are always a sign of weakness
or remissness on the part of the government. There is not a single
ill-doer who could not be turned to some good. The State has no right
to put to death, even for the sake of making an example, any one whom
it can leave alive without danger.

The right of pardoning or exempting the guilty from a penalty imposed
by the law and pronounced by the judge belongs only to the authority
which is superior to both judge and law, _i.e._ the Sovereign;
even its right in this matter is far from clear, and the cases for
exercising it are extremely rare. In a well-governed State, there
are few punishments, not because there are many pardons, but because
criminals are rare; it is when a State is in decay that the multitude
of crimes is a guarantee of impunity. Under the Roman Republic, neither
the Senate nor the Consuls ever attempted to pardon; even the people
never did so, though it sometimes revoked its own decision. Frequent
pardons mean that crime will soon need them no longer, and no-one can
help seeing whither that leads. But I feel my heart protesting and
restraining my pen; let us leave these questions to the just man who
has never offended, and would himself stand in no need of pardon.




CHAPTER VI

LAW


By the social compact we have given the body politic existence and
life: we have now by legislation to give it movement and will. For the
original act by which the body is formed and united still in no respect
determines what it ought to do for its preservation.

What is well and in conformity with order is so by the nature of
things and independently of human conventions. All justice comes from
God, who is its sole source; but if we knew how to receive so high an
inspiration, we should need neither government nor laws. Doubtless,
there is a universal justice emanating from reason alone; but this
justice, to be admitted among us, must be mutual. Humanly speaking, in
default of natural sanctions, the laws of justice are ineffective among
men: they merely make for the good of the wicked and the undoing of
the just, when the just man observes them towards everybody and nobody
observes them towards him. Conventions and laws are therefore needed to
join rights to duties and refer justice to its object. In the state of
nature, where everything is common, I owe nothing to him whom I nave
promised nothing; I recognise as belonging to others only what is of no
use to me. In the state of society all rights are fixed by law, and the
case becomes different.

But what, after all, is a law? As long as we remain satisfied with
attaching purely metaphysical ideas to the word, we shall go on arguing
without arriving at an understanding; and when we have defined a law of
nature, we shall be no nearer the definition of a law of the State.

I have already said that there can be no general will directed to a
particular object. Such an object must be either within or outside the
State. If outside, a will which is alien to it cannot be, in relation
to it, general; if within, it is part of the State, and in that case
there arises a relation between whole and part which makes them two
separate beings, of which the part is one, and the whole minus the part
the other. But the whole minus a part cannot be the whole; and while
this relation persists, there can be no whole, but only two unequal
parts; and it follows that the will of one is no longer in any respect
general in relation to the other.

But when the whole people decrees for the whole people, it is
considering only itself; and if a relation is then formed, it is
between two aspects of the entire object, without there being any
division of the whole. In that case the matter about which the decree
is made is, like the decreeing will general. This act is what I call a
law.

When I say that the object of laws is always general, I mean that
law considers subjects _en masse_ and actions in the abstract, and
never a particular person or action. Thus the law may indeed decree
that there shall be privileges, but cannot confer them on anybody by
name. It may set up several classes of citizens, and even lay down
the qualifications for membership of these classes, but it cannot
nominate such and such persons as belonging to them; it may establish a
monarchical government and hereditary succession, but it cannot choose
a king, or nominate a royal family. In a word, no function which has a
particular object belongs to the legislative power.

On this view, we at once see that it can no longer be asked whose
business it is to make laws, since they are acts of the general will:
nor whether the prince is above the law, since he is a member of the
State; nor whether the law can be unjust, since no one is unjust to
himself; nor how we can be both free and subject to the laws since they
are but registers of our wills.

We see further that, as the law unites universality of will with
universality of object, what a man, whoever he be, commands of his
own motion cannot be a law; and even what the Sovereign commands with
regard to a particular matter is no nearer being a law, but is a
decree, an act, not of sovereignty, but of magistracy.

I therefore give the name 'Republic' to every State that is governed by
laws, no matter what the form of its administration may be: for only
in such a case does the public interest govern, and the _res publica_
rank as a _reality_. Every legitimate government is republican;[1] what
government is I will explain later on.

Laws are, properly speaking, only the conditions of civil association.
The people, being subject to the laws, ought to be their author:
the conditions of the society ought to be regulated solely by those
who come together to form it. But how are they to regulate them? Is
it to be by common agreement, by a sudden inspiration? Has the body
politic an organ to declare its will? Who can give it the foresight to
formulate and announce its acts in advance? Or how is it to announce
them in the hour of need? How can a blind multitude, which often does
not know what it wills, because it rarely knows what is good for it,
carry out for itself so great and difficult an enterprise as a system
of legislation? Of itself the people wills always the good, but of
itself it by no means always sees it. The general will is always in
the right, but the judgment which guides it is not always enlightened.
It must be got to see objects as they are, and sometimes as they ought
to appear to it; it must be shown the good road it is in search of,
secured from the seductive influences of individual wills, taught to
see times and spaces as a series, and made to weigh the attractions
of present and sensible advantages against the danger of distant and
hidden evils. The individuals see the good they reject; the public
wills the good it does not see. All stand equally in need of guidance.
The former must be compelled to bring their wills into conformity with
their reason; the latter must be taught to know what it wills. If that
is done, public enlightenment leads to the union of understanding and
will in the social body: the parts are made to work exactly together,
and the whole is raised to its highest power. This makes a legislator
necessary.


[1] I understand by this word, not merely an aristocracy or a
democracy, but generally any government directed by the general will,
which is the law. To be legitimate, the government must be, not one
with the Sovereign, but its minister. In such a case even a monarchy is
a Republic. This will be made clearer in the following book.




CHAPTER VII

THE LEGISLATOR


In order to discover the rules of society best suited to nations,
a superior intelligence beholding all the passions of men without
experiencing any of them would be needed. This intelligence would have
to be wholly unrelated to our nature, while knowing it through and
through; its happiness would have to be independent of us, and yet
ready to occupy itself with ours; and lastly, it would have, in the
march of time, to look forward to a distant glory, and, working in one
century, to be able to enjoy in the next.[1] It would take gods to give
men laws.

What Caligula argued from the facts, Plato, in the dialogue called the
_Politicus_, argued in defining the civil or kingly man, on the basis
of right. But if great princes are rare, how much more so are great
legislators? The former have only to follow the pattern which the
latter have to lay down. The legislator is the engineer who invents
the machine, the prince merely the mechanic who sets it up and makes
it go. "At the birth of societies," says Montesquieu, "the rulers of
Republics establish institutions, and afterwards the institutions mould
the rulers."[2]

He who dares to undertake the making of a people's institutions ought
to feel himself capable, so to speak, of changing human nature, of
transforming each individual, who is by himself a complete and solitary
whole, into part of a greater whole from which he in a manner receives
his life and being; of altering man's constitution for the purpose of
strengthening it; and of substituting a partial and moral existence
for the physical and independent existence nature has conferred on
us all. He must, in a word, take away from man his own resources and
give him instead new ones alien to him, and incapable of being made
use of without the help of other men. The more completely these
natural resources are annihilated, the greater and the more lasting
are those which he acquires, and the more stable and perfect the new
institutions; so that if each citizen is nothing and can do nothing
without the rest, and the resources acquired by the whole are equal
or superior to the aggregate of the resources of all the individuals,
it may be said that legislation is at the highest possible point of
perfection.

The legislator occupies in every respect an extraordinary position
in the State. If he should do so by reason of his genius, he does so
no less by reason of his office, which is neither magistracy, nor
Sovereignty. This office, which sets up the Republic, nowhere enters
into its constitution; it is an individual and superior function, which
has nothing in common with human empire; for if he who holds command
over men ought not to have command over the laws, he who has command
over the laws ought not any more to have it over men; or else his laws
would be the ministers of his passions and would often merely serve to
perpetuate his injustices: his private aims would inevitably mar the
sanctity of his work.

When Lycurgus gave laws to his country, he began by resigning
the throne. It was the custom of most Greek towns to entrust the
establishment of their laws to foreigners. The Republics of modern
Italy in many cases followed this example; Geneva did the same and
profited by it.[3] Rome, when it was most prosperous, suffered a
revival of all the crimes of tyranny, and was brought to the verge of
destruction, because it put the legislative authority and the sovereign
power into the same hands.

Nevertheless, the decemvirs themselves never claimed the right to pass
any law merely on their own authority. "Nothing we propose to you,"
they said to the people, "can pass into law without your consent.
Romans, be yourselves the authors of the laws which are to make you
happy."

He, therefore, who draws up the laws has, or should have, no right of
legislation, and the people cannot, even if it wishes, deprive itself
of this incommunicable right, because, according to the fundamental
compact, only the general will can bind the individuals, and there
can be no assurance that a particular will is in conformity with the
general will, until it has been put to the free vote of the people.
This I have said already; but it is worth while to repeat it.

Thus in the task of legislation we find together two things which
appear to be incompatible: an enterprise too difficult for human
powers, and, for its execution, an authority that is no authority.

There is a further difficulty that deserves attention. Wise men, if
they try to speak their language to the common herd instead of its
own, cannot possibly make themselves understood. There are a thousand
kinds of ideas which it is impossible to translate into popular
language. Conceptions that are too general and objects that are too
remote are equally out of its range: each individual, having no taste
for any other plan of government than that which suits his particular
interest, finds it difficult to realise the advantages he might hope
to draw from the continual privations good laws impose. For a young
people to be able to relish sound principles of political theory and
follow the fundamental rules of statecraft, the effect would have to
become the cause; the social spirit, which should be created by these
institutions, would have to preside over their very foundation; and men
would have to be before law what they should become by means of law.
The legislator therefore, being unable to appeal to either force or
reason, must have recourse to an authority of a different order capable
of constraining without violence and persuading without convincing.

This is what has, in all ages, compelled the fathers of nations to
have recourse to divine intervention and credit the gods with their
own wisdom, in order that the peoples, submitting to the laws of the
State as to those of nature, and recognising the same power in the
formation of the city as in that of man, might obey freely, and bear
with docility the yoke of the public happiness.

This sublime reason, far above the range of the common herd, is that
whose decisions the legislator puts into the mouth of the immortals,
in order to constrain by divine authority those whom human prudence
could not move.[4] But it is not anybody who can make the gods speak,
or get himself believed when he proclaims himself their interpreter.
The great soul of the legislator is the only miracle that can prove
his mission. Any man may grave tablets of stone, or buy an oracle; or
feign secret intercourse with some divinity, or train a bird to whisper
in his ear, or find other vulgar ways of imposing on the people. He
whose knowledge goes no further may perhaps gather round him a band of
fools; but he will never found an empire, and his extravagances will
quickly perish with him. Idle tricks form a passing tie; only wisdom
can make it lasting. The Judaic law, which still subsists, and that
of the child of Ishmael, which, for ten centuries, has ruled half the
world, still proclaim the great men who laid them down; and, while the
pride of philosophy or the blind spirit of faction sees in them no more
than lucky impostures, the true political theorist admires, in the
institutions they set up, the great and powerful genius which presides
over things made to endure.

We should not, with Warburton, conclude from this that politics and
religion have among us a common object, but that, in the first periods
of nations, the one is used as an instrument for the other.


[1] A people becomes famous only when its legislation begins to
decline. We do not know for how many centuries the system of Lycurgus
made the Spartans happy before the rest of Greece took any notice of it.

[2] Montesquieu, _The Greatness and Decadence of the Romans_, ch. i.

[3] Those who know Calvin only as a theologian much underestimate the
extent of his genius. The codification of our wise edicts, in which
he played a large part, does him no less honour than his _Institute_.
Whatever revolution time may bring in our religion, so long as the
spirit of patriotism and liberty still lives among us, the memory of
this great man will be for ever blessed.

[4] "In truth," says Macchiavelli, "there has never been, in any
country, an extraordinary legislator who has not had recourse to God;
for otherwise his laws would not have been accepted: there are, in
fact, many useful truths of which a wise man may have knowledge without
their having in themselves such clear reasons for their being so as
to be able to convince others" (_Discourses on Livy_, Bk. v, ch. xi).
(Rousseau quotes the Italian.)




CHAPTER VIII

THE PEOPLE


As, before putting up a large building, the architect surveys and
sounds the site to see if it will bear the weight, the wise legislator
does not begin by laying down laws good in themselves, but by
investigating the fitness of the people, for which they are destined,
to receive them. Plato refused to legislate for the Arcadians and the
Cyrenæans, because he knew that both peoples were rich and could not
put up with equality; and good laws and bad men were found together
in Crete, because Minos had inflicted discipline on a people already
burdened with vice.

A thousand nations have achieved earthly greatness, that could never
have endured good laws; even such as could have endured them could
have done so only for a very brief period of their long history. Most
peoples, like most men, are docile only in youth; as they grow old they
become incorrigible. When once customs have become established and
prejudices inveterate, it is dangerous and useless to attempt their
reformation; the people, like the foolish and cowardly patients who
rave at sight of the doctor, can no longer bear that any one should lay
hands on its faults to remedy them.

There are indeed times in the history of States when, just as some
kinds of illness turn men's heads and make them forget the past,
periods of violence and revolutions do to peoples what these crises do
to individuals: horror of the past takes the place of forgetfulness,
and the State, set on fire by civil wars, is born again, so to speak,
from its ashes, and takes on anew, fresh from the jaws of death, the
vigour of youth. Such were Sparta at the time of Lycurgus, Rome after
the Tarquins, and, in modern times, Holland and Switzerland after the
expulsion of the tyrants.

But such events are rare; they are exceptions, the cause of which
is always to be found in the particular constitution of the State
concerned. They cannot even happen twice to the same people, for it
can make itself free as long as it remains barbarous, but not when the
civic impulse has lost its vigour. Then disturbances may destroy it,
but revolutions cannot mend it: it needs a master, and not a liberator.
Free peoples, be mindful of maxim; "Liberty may be gained, but can
never be recovered."

Youth is not infancy. There is for nations, as for men, a period of
youth, or, shall we say, maturity, before which they should not be
made subject to laws; but the maturity of a people is not always
easily recognisable, and, if it is anticipated, the work is spoilt.
One people is amenable to discipline from the beginning; another, not
after ten centuries. Russia will never be really civilised, because
it was civilised too soon. Peter had a genius for imitation; but he
lacked true genius, which is creative and makes all from nothing. He
did some good things, but most of what he did was out of place. He
saw that his people was barbarous, but did not see that it was not
ripe for civilisation: he wanted to civilise it when it needed only
hardening. His first wish was to make Germans or Englishmen, when he
ought to have been making Russians; and he prevented his subjects from
ever becoming what they might have been by persuading them that they
were what they are not. In this fashion too a French teacher turns out
his pupil to be an infant prodigy, and for the rest of his life to be
nothing whatsoever. The empire of Russia will aspire to conquer Europe,
and will itself be conquered. The Tartars, its subjects or neighbours,
will become its masters and ours, by a revolution which I regard as
inevitable. Indeed, all the kings of Europe are working in concert to
hasten its coming.As nature has set bounds to the stature of a well-made man, and,
outside those limits, makes nothing but giants or dwarfs, similarly,
for the constitution of a State to be at its best, it is possible to
fix limits that will make it neither too large for good government,
nor too small for self-maintenance. In every body politic there is
a _maximum_ strength which it cannot exceed and which it only loses
by increasing in size. Every extension of the social tie means its
relaxation; and, generally speaking, a small State is stronger in
proportion than a great one.

A thousand arguments could be advanced in favour of this principle.
First, long distances make administration more difficult, just as a
weight becomes heavier at the end of a longer lever. Administration
therefore becomes more and more burdensome as the distance grows
greater; for, in the first place, each city has its own, which is
paid for by the people: each district its own, still paid for by the
people: then comes each province, and then the great governments,
satrapies, and vice-royalties, always costing more the higher you go,
and always at the expense of the unfortunate people. Last of all comes
the supreme administration, which eclipses all the rest. All these
overcharges are a continual drain upon the subjects; so far from being
better governed by all these different orders, they are worse governed
than if there were only a single authority over them. In the meantime,
there scarce remain resources enough to meet emergencies; and, when
recourse must be had to these, the State is always on the eve of
destruction.

This is not all; not only has the government less vigour and
promptitude for securing the observance of the laws, preventing
nuisances, correcting abuses, and guarding against seditious
undertakings begun in distant places; the people has less affection for
its rulers, whom it never sees, for its country, which, to its eyes,
seems like the world, and for its fellow-citizens, most of whom are
unknown to it. The same laws cannot suit so many diverse provinces with
different customs, situated in the most various climates, and incapable
of enduring a uniform government. Different laws lead only to trouble
and confusion among peoples which, living under the same rulers and in
constant communication one with another, intermingle and intermarry,
and, coming under the sway of new customs, never know if they can call
their very patrimony their own. Talent is buried, virtue unknown and
vice unpunished, among such a multitude of men who do not know one
another, gathered together in one place at the seat of the central
administration. The leaders, overwhelmed with business, see nothing
for themselves; the State is governed by clerks. Finally, the measures
which have to be taken to, maintain the general authority, which all
these distant officials wish to escape or to impose upon, absorb all
the energy of the public, so that there is none left for the happiness
of the people. There is hardly enough to defend it when need arises,
and thus a body which is too big for its constitution gives way and
falls crushed under its own weight.

Again, the State must assure itself a safe foundation, if it is to
have stability, and to be able to resist the shocks it cannot help
experiencing, as well as the efforts it will be forced to make for
its maintenance; for all peoples have a kind of centrifugal force
that makes them continually act one against another, and tend to
aggrandise themselves at their neighbours' expense, like the vortices
of Descartes. Thus the weak run the risk of being soon swallowed up;
and it is almost impossible for any one to preserve itself except by
putting itself in a state of equilibrium with all, so that the pressure
is on all sides practically equal.

It may therefore be seen that there are reasons for expansion and
reasons for contraction; and it is no small part of the statesman's
skill to hit between them the mean that is most favourable to the
preservation of the State. It may be said that the reason for
expansion, being merely external and relative, ought to be subordinate
to the reasons for contraction, which are internal and absolute. A
strong and healthy constitution is the first thing to look for; and it
is better to count on the vigour which comes of good government than on
the resources a great territory furnishes.

It may be added that there have been known States so constituted that
the necessity of making conquests entered into their very constitution,
and that, in order to maintain themselves, they were forced to expand
ceaselessly. It may be that they congratulated themselves greatly on
this fortunate necessity, which none the less indicated to them, along
with the limits of their greatness, the inevitable moment of their fall.




CHAPTER X

THE PEOPLE (_continued_)


A body politic may be measured in two ways--either by the extent of its
territory, or by the number of its people; and there is, between these
two measurements, a right relation which makes the State really great.
The men make the State, and the territory sustains the men; the right
relation therefore is that the land should suffice for the maintenance
of the inhabitants, and that there should be as many inhabitants as
the land can maintain. In this proportion lies the _maximum_ strength
of a given number of people; for if there is too much land, it is
troublesome to guard and inadequately cultivated, produces more than is
needed, and soon gives rise to wars of defence; if there is not enough,
the State depends on its neighbours for what it needs over and above,
and this soon gives rise to wars of offence. Every people, to which
its situation gives no choice save that between commerce and war, is
weak in itself: it depends on its neighbours, and on circumstances;
its existence can never be more than short and uncertain. It either
conquers others, and changes its situation, or it is conquered and
becomes nothing. Only insignificance or greatness can keep it free.

No fixed relation can be stated between the extent of the territory
and the population that are adequate one to the other, both because
of the differences in the quality of land, in its fertility, in the
nature of its products, and in the influence of climate, and because of
the different tempers of those who inhabit it; for some in a fertile
country consume little, and others on an ungrateful soil much. The
greater or less fecundity of women, the conditions that are more or
less favourable in each country to the growth of population, and the
influence the legislator can hope to exercise by his institutions, must
also be taken into account. The legislator therefore should not go
by what he sees, but by what he foresees; he should stop not so much
at the state in which he actually finds the population, as at that
to which it ought naturally to attain. Lastly, there are countless
cases in which the particular local circumstances demand or allow
the acquisition of a greater territory than seems necessary. Thus,
expansion will be great in a mountainous country, where the natural
products, _i.e._ woods and pastures, need less labour, where we know
from experience that women are more fertile than in the plains, and
where a great expanse of slope affords only a small level tract that
can be counted on for vegetation. On the other hand, contraction is
possible on the coast, even in lands of rocks and nearly barren sands,
because there fishing makes up to a great extent for the lack of
land-produce, because the inhabitants have to congregate together more
in order to repel pirates, and further because it is easier to unburden
the country of its superfluous inhabitants by means of colonies.

To these conditions of law-giving must be added one other which,
though it cannot take the place of the rest, renders them all useless
when it is absent. This is the enjoyment of peace and plenty; for the
moment at which a State sets its house in order is, like the moment
when a battalion is forming up, that when its body is least capable of
offering resistance and easiest to destroy. A better resistance could
be made at a time of absolute disorganisation than at a moment of
fermentation, when each is occupied with his own position and not with
the danger. If war, famine, or sedition arises at this time of crisis,
the State will inevitably be overthrown.

Not that many governments have not been set up during such storms; but
in such cases these governments are themselves the State's destroyers.
Usurpers always bring about or select troublous times to get passed,
under cover of the public terror, destructive laws, which the people
would never adopt in cold blood. The moment chosen is one of the surest
means of distinguishing the work of the legislator from that of the
tyrant.

What people, then, is a fit subject for legislation? One which,
already bound by some unity of origin, interest, or convention, has
never yet felt the real yoke of law; one that has neither customs nor
superstitions deeply ingrained, one which stands in no fear of being
overwhelmed by sudden invasion; one which, without entering into its
neighbours' quarrels, can resist each of them single-handed, or get the
help of one to repel another; one in which every member may be known by
every other, and there is no need to lay on any man burdens too heavy
for a man to bear; one which can do without other peoples, and without
which all others can do;[1] one which is neither rich nor poor, but
self-sufficient; and, lastly, one which unites the consistency of an
ancient people with the docility of a new one. Legislation is made
difficult less by what it is necessary to build up than by what has to
be destroyed; and what makes success so rare is the impossibility of
finding natural simplicity together with social requirements. All these
conditions are indeed rarely found united, and therefore few States
have good constitutions.

There is still in Europe one country capable of being given
laws--Corsica. The valour and persistency with which that brave people
has regained and defended its liberty well deserves that some wise man
should teach it how to preserve what it has won. I have a feeling that
some day that little island will astonish Europe.


[1] If there were two neighbouring peoples, one of which could not
do without the other, it would be very hard on the former, and very
dangerous for the latter. Every wise nation, in such a case, would make
haste to free the other from dependence. The Republic of Thlascala,
enclosed by the Mexican Empire, preferred doing without salt to
buying from the Mexicans, or even getting it from them as a gift
The Thlascalans were wise enough to see the snare hidden under such
liberality. They kept their freedom, and that little State, shut up in
that great Empire, was finally the instrument of its ruin.




CHAPTER XI

THE VARIOUS SYSTEMS OF LEGISLATION


If we ask in what precisely consists the greatest good of all, which
should be the end of every system of legislation, we shall find it
reduce itself to two main objects, liberty and equality--liberty,
because all particular dependence means so much force taken from the
body of the State, and equality, because liberty cannot exist without
it.

I have already defined civil liberty; by equality, we should
understand, not that the degrees of power and riches are to be
absolutely identical for everybody; but that power shall never be
great enough for violence, and shall always be exercised by virtue of
rank and law; and that, in respect of riches, no citizen shall ever be
wealthy enough to buy another, and none poor enough to be forced to
sell himself:[1] which implies, on the part of the great, moderation
in goods and position, and, on the side of the common sort, moderation
in avarice and covetousness.

Such equality, we are told, is an unpractical ideal that cannot
actually exist. But if its abuse is inevitable, does it follow that we
should not at least make regulations concerning it? It is precisely
because the force of circumstances tends continually to destroy
equality that the force of legislation should always tend to its
maintenance.

But these general objects of every good legislative system need
modifying in every country in accordance with the local situation
and the temper of the inhabitants; and these circumstances should
determine, in each case, the particular system of institutions which
is best, not perhaps in itself, but for the State for which it is
destined. If, for instance, the soil is barren and unproductive, or
the land too crowded for its inhabitants, the people should turn
to industry and the crafts, and exchange what they produce for the
commodities they lack. If, on the other hand, a people dwells in rich
plains and fertile slopes, or, in a good land, lacks inhabitants, it
should give all its attention to agriculture, which causes men to
multiply, and should drive out the crafts, which would only result in
depopulation, by grouping in a few localities the few inhabitants there
are.[2] If a nation dwells on an extensive and convenient coast-line,
let it cover the sea with ships and foster commerce and navigation. It
will have a life that will be short and glorious. If, on its coasts,
the sea washes nothing but almost inaccessible rocks, let it remain
barbarous and ichthyophagous: it will have a quieter, perhaps a better,
and certainly a happier life. In a word, besides the principles that
are common to all, every nation has in itself something that gives them
a particular application, and makes its legislation peculiarly its own.
Thus, among the Jews long ago and more recently among the Arabs, the
chief object was religion, among the Athenians letters, at Carthage and
Tyre commerce, at Rhodes shipping, at Sparta war, at Rome virtue. The
author of _The Spirit of the Laws_ has shown with many examples by
what art the legislator directs the constitution towards each of these
objects.

What makes the constitution of a State really solid and lasting is
the due observance of what is proper, so that the natural relations
are always in agreement with the laws on every point, and law only
serves, so to speak, to assure, accompany and rectify them. But if
the legislator mistakes his object and adopts a principle other than
circumstances naturally direct; if his principle makes for servitude
while they make for liberty, or if it makes for riches, while they
make for populousness, or if it makes for peace, while they make
for conquest--the laws will insensibly lose their influence, the
constitution will alter, and the State will have no rest from trouble
till it is either destroyed or changed, and nature has resumed her
invincible sway.


[1] If the object is to give the State consistency, bring the two
extremes as near to each other as possible; allow neither rich men
nor beggars. These two estates, which are naturally inseparable, are
equally fatal to the common good; from the one come the friends of
tyranny, and from the other tyrants. It is always between them that
public liberty is put up to auction; the one buys, and the other sells.

[2] "Any branch of foreign commerce," says M. d'Argenson, "creates on
the whole only apparent advantage for the kingdom in general; it may
enrich some individuals, or even some towns; but the nation as a whole
gains nothing by it, and the people is no better off."




CHAPTER XII

THE DIVISION OF THE LAWS


If the whole is to be set in order, and the commonwealth put into the
best possible shape, there are various relations to be considered.
First, there is the action of the complete body upon itself, the
relation of the whole to the whole, of the Sovereign to the State; and
this relation, as we shall see, is made up of the relations of the
intermediate terms.

The laws which regulate this relation bear the name of political laws,
and are also called fundamental laws, not without reason if they are
wise. For, if there is, in each State, only one good system, the
people that is in possession of it should hold fast to this; but if
the established order is bad, why should laws that prevent men from
being good be regarded as fundamental? Besides, in any case, a people
is always in a position to change its laws, however good; for, if it
choose to do itself harm, who can have a right to stop it?

The second relation is that of the members one to another, or to the
body as a whole; and this relation should be in the first respect as
unimportant, and in the second as important, as possible. Each citizen
would then be perfectly independent of all the rest, and at the same
time very dependent on the city; which is brought about always by the
same means, as the strength of the State can alone secure the liberty
of its members. From this second relation arise civil laws.

We may consider also a third kind of relation between the individual
and the law, a relation of disobedience to its penalty. This gives
rise to the setting up of criminal laws, which, at bottom, are less a
particular class of law than the sanction behind all the rest.

Along with these three kinds of law goes a fourth, most important of
all, which is not graven on tablets of marble or brass, but on the
hearts of the citizens. This forms the real constitution of the State,
takes on every day new powers, when other laws decay or die out,
restores them or takes their place, keeps a people in the ways in which
it was meant to go, and insensibly replaces authority by the force
of habit. I am speaking of morality, of custom, above all of public
opinion; a power unknown to political thinkers, on which none the less
success in everything else depends. With this the great legislator
concerns himself in secret, though he seems to confine himself to
particular regulations; for these are only the arc of the arch, while
manners and morals, slower to arise, form in the end its immovable
keystone.

Among the different classes of laws, the political, which determine the
form of the government, are alone relevant to my subject.
I warn the reader that this chapter requires careful reading, and that
I am unable to make myself clear to those who refuse to be attentive.

Every free action is produced by the concurrence of two causes; one
moral, _i.e._ the will which determines the act; the other physical,
_i.e._ the power which executes it. When I walk towards an object, it
is necessary first that I should will to go there, and, in the second
place, that my feet should carry me. If a paralytic wills to run and
an active man wills not to, they will both stay where they are. The
body politic has the same motive powers; here too force and will are
distinguished, will under the name of legislative power and force under
that of executive power. Without their concurrence, nothing is, or
should be, done.

We have seen that the legislative power belongs to the people, and can
belong to it alone. It may, on the other hand, readily be seen, from
the principles laid down above, that the executive power cannot belong
to the generality as legislature or Sovereign, because it consists
wholly of particular acts which fall outside the competency of the law,
and consequently of the Sovereign, whose acts must always be laws.

The public force therefore needs an agent of its own to bind it
together and set it to work under the direction of the general will, to
serve as a means of communication between the State and the Sovereign,
and to do for the collective person more or less what the union of soul
and body does for man. Here we have what is, in the State, the basis of
government, often wrongly confused with the Sovereign, whose minister
it is.

What then is government? An intermediate body set up between the
subjects and the Sovereign, to secure their mutual correspondence,
charged with the execution of the laws and the maintenance of liberty,
both civil and political.

The members of this body are called magistrates or _kings_, that is to
say _governors_, and the whole body bears the name _prince_.[1] Thus
those who hold that the act, by which a people puts itself under a
prince, is not a contract, are certainly right. It is simply and solely
a commission, an employment, in which the rulers, mere officials of the
Sovereign, exercise in their own name the power of which it makes them
depositaries. This power it can limit, modify or recover at pleasure;
for the alienation of such a right is incompatible with the nature of
the social body, and contrary to the end of association.

I call then _government_, or supreme administration, the legitimate
exercise of the executive power, and prince or magistrate the man or
the body entrusted with that administration.

In government reside the intermediate forces whose relations make up
that of the whole to the whole, or of the Sovereign to the State. This
last relation may be represented as that between the extreme terms of a
continuous proportion, which has government as its mean proportional.
The government gets from the Sovereign the orders it gives the people,
and, for the State to be properly balanced, there must, when everything
is reckoned in, be equality between the product or power of the
government taken in itself, and the product or power of the citizens,
who are on the one hand sovereign and on the other subject.

Furthermore, none of these three terms can be altered without the
equality being instantly destroyed. If the Sovereign desires to govern,
or the magistrate to give laws, or if the subjects refuse to obey,
disorder takes the place of regularity, force and will no longer act
together, and the State is dissolved and falls into despotism or
anarchy. Lastly, as there is only one mean proportional between each
relation, there is also only one good government possible for a State.
But, as countless events may change the relations of a people, not only
may different governments be good for different peoples, but also for
the same people at different times.

In attempting to give some idea of the various relations that may hold
between these two extreme terms, I shall take as an example the number
of a people, which is the most easily expressible.

Suppose the State is composed of ten thousand citizens. The Sovereign
can only be considered collectively and as a body; but each member, as
being a subject, is regarded as an individual: thus the Sovereign is
to the subject as ten thousand to one, _i.e._ each member of the State
has as his share only a ten-thousandth part of the sovereign authority,
although he is wholly under its control. If the people numbers a
hundred thousand, the condition of the subject undergoes no change,
and each equally is under the whole authority of the laws, while his
vote, being reduced to one hundred thousandth part, has ten times less
influence in drawing them up. The subject therefore remaining always
a unit, the relation between him and the Sovereign increases with the
number of the citizens. From this it follows that, the larger the
State, the less the liberty.

When I say the relation increases, I mean that it grows more unequal.
Thus the greater it is in the geometrical sense, the less relation
there is in the ordinary sense of the word. In the former sense,
the relation, considered according to quantity, is expressed by the
quotient; in the latter, considered according to identity, it is
reckoned by similarity.

Now, the less relation the particular wills have to the general will,
that is, morals and manners to laws, the more should the repressive
force be increased. The government, then, to be good, should be
proportionately stronger as the people is more numerous.

On the other hand, as the growth of the State gives the depositaries
of the public authority more temptations and chances of abusing their
power, the greater the force with which the government ought to be
endowed for keeping the people in hand, the greater too should be the
force at the disposal of the Sovereign for keeping the government in
hand. I am speaking, not of absolute force, but of the relative force
of the different parts of the State.

It follows from this double relation that the continuous proportion
between the Sovereign, the prince and the people, is by no means an
arbitrary idea, but a necessary consequence of the nature of the body
politic. It follows further that, one of the extreme terms, viz. the
people, as subject, being fixed and represented by unity, whenever the
duplicate ratio increases or diminishes, the simple ratio does the
same, and is changed accordingly. From this we see that there is not a
single unique and absolute form of government, but as many governments
differing in nature as there are States differing in size.

If, ridiculing this system, any one were to say that, in order to find
the mean proportional and give form to the body of the government,
it is only necessary, according to me, to find the square root of
the number of the people, I should answer that I am here taking this
number only as an instance; that the relations of which I am speaking
are not measured by the number of men alone, but generally by the
amount of action, which is a combination of a multitude of causes; and
that, further, if, to save words, I borrow for a moment the terms of
geometry, I am none the less well aware that moral quantities do not
allow of geometrical accuracy.

The government is on a small scale what the body politic which includes
it is on a great one. It is a moral person endowed with certain
faculties, active like the Sovereign and passive like the State,
and capable of being resolved into other similar relations. This
accordingly gives rise to a new proportion, within which there is yet
another, according to the arrangement of the magistracies, till an
indivisible middle term is reached, _i.e._ a single ruler or supreme
magistrate, who may be represented, in the midst of this progression,
as the unity between the fractional and the ordinal series.

Without encumbering ourselves with this multiplication of terms, let us
rest content with regarding government as a new body within the State,
distinct from the people and the Sovereign, and intermediate between
them.

There is between these two bodies this essential difference, that
the State exists by itself, and the government only through the
Sovereign. Thus the dominant will of the prince is, or should be,
nothing but the general will or the law; his force is only the public
force concentrated in his hands, and, as soon as he tries to base
any absolute and independent act on his own authority, the tie that
binds the whole together begins to be loosened. If finally the prince
should come to have a particular will more active than the will of the
Sovereign, and should employ the public force in his hands in obedience
to this particular will, there would be, so to speak, two Sovereigns,
one rightful and the other actual, the social union would evaporate
instantly, and the body politic would be dissolved.

However, in order that the government may have a true existence
and a real life distinguishing it from the body of the State, and
in order that all its members may be able to act in concert and
fulfil the end for which it was set up, it must have a particular
personality, a sensibility common to its members, and a force and will
of its own making for its preservation. This particular existence
implies assemblies, councils, power of deliberation and decision,
rights, titles, and privileges belonging exclusively to the prince
and making the office of magistrate more honourable in proportion
as it is more troublesome. The difficulties lie in the manner of so
ordering this subordinate whole within the whole, that it in no way
alters the general constitution by affirmation of its own, and always
distinguishes the particular force it possesses, which is destined
to aid in its preservation, from the public force, which is destined
to the preservation of the State; and, in a word, is always ready to
sacrifice the government to the people, and never to sacrifice the
people to the government.

Furthermore, although the artificial body of the government is the work
of another artificial body, and has, we may say, only a borrowed and
subordinate life, this does not prevent it from being able to act with
more or less vigour or promptitude, or from being, so to speak, in more
or less robust health. Finally, without departing directly from the
end for which it was instituted, it may deviate more or less from it,
according to the manner of its constitution.

From all these differences arise the various relations which the
government ought to bear to the body of the State, according to the
accidental and particular relations by which the State itself is
modified, for often the government that is best in itself will become
the most pernicious, if the relations in which it stands have altered
according to the defects of the body politic to which it belongs.


[1] Thus at Venice the College, even in the absence of the Doge, is
called "Most Serene Prince."




CHAPTER II

THE CONSTITUENT PRINCIPLE IN THE VARIOUS FORMS OF GOVERNMENT


To set forth the general cause of the above differences, we must here
distinguish between government and its principle, as we did before
between the State and the Sovereign.

The body of the magistrate may be composed of a greater or a less
number of members. We said that the relation of the Sovereign to the
subjects was greater in proportion as the people was more numerous,
and, by a clear analogy, we may say the same of the relation of the
government to the magistrates.

But the total force of the government, being always that of the State,
is invariable; so that, the more of this force it expends on its own
members, the less it has left to employ on the whole people.

The more numerous the magistrates, therefore, the weaker the
government. This principle being fundamental, we must do our best to
make it clear.

In the person of the magistrate we can distinguish three essentially
different wills: first, the private will of the individual, tending
only to his personal advantage; secondly, the common will of the
magistrates, which is relative solely to the advantage of the prince,
and may be called corporate will, being general in relation to the
government, and particular in relation to the State, of which the
government forms part; and, in the third place, the will of the people
or the sovereign will, which is general both in relation to the State
regarded as the whole, and to the government regarded as a part of the
whole.

In a perfect act of legislation, the individual or particular will
should be at zero; the corporate will belonging to the government
should occupy a very subordinate position; and, consequently, the
general or sovereign will should always predominate and should be the
sole guide of all the rest.

According to the natural order, on the other hand, these different
wills become more active in proportion as they are concentrated. Thus,
the general will is always the weakest, the corporate will second, and
the individual will strongest of all: so that, in the government, each
member is first of all himself, then a magistrate, and then a citizen
--in an order exactly the reverse of what the social system requires.

This granted, if the whole government is in the hands of one man, the
particular and the corporate will are wholly united, and consequently
the latter is at its highest possible degree of intensity. But, as the
use to which the force is put depends on the degree reached by the
will, and as the absolute force of the government is invariable, it
follows that the most active government is that of one man.

Suppose, on the other hand, we unite the government with the
legislative authority, and make the Sovereign prince also, and all the
citizens so many magistrates: then the corporate will, being confounded
with the general will, can possess no greater activity than that will,
and must leave the particular will as strong as it can possibly be.
Thus, the government, having always the same absolute force, will be at
the lowest point of its relative force or activity.

These relations are incontestable, and there are other considerations
which still further confirm them. We can see, for instance, that
each magistrate is more active in the body to which he belongs than
each citizen in that to which he belongs, and that consequently the
particular will has much more influence on the acts of the government
than on those of the Sovereign; for each magistrate is almost always
charged with some governmental function, while each citizen, taken
singly, exercises no function of Sovereignty. Furthermore, the bigger
the State grows, the more its real force increases, though not in
direct proportion to its growth; but, the State remaining the same,
the number of magistrates may increase to any extent, without the
government gaining any greater real force; for its force is that of the
State, the dimension of which remains equal. Thus the relative force or
activity of the government decreases, while its absolute or real force
cannot increase.

Moreover, it is a certainty that promptitude in execution diminishes
as more people are put in charge of it: where prudence is made too
much of, not enough is made of fortune; opportunity is let slip, and
deliberation results in the loss of its object.

I have just proved that the government grows remiss in proportion as
the number of the magistrates increases; and I previously proved that,
the more numerous the people, the greater should be the repressive
force. From this it follows that the relation of the magistrates to the
government should vary inversely to the relation of the subjects to the
Sovereign; that is to say, the larger the State, the more should the
government be tightened, so that the number of the rulers diminish in
proportion to the increase of that of the people.

It should be added that I am here speaking of the relative strength of
the government, and not of its rectitude: for, on the other hand, the
more numerous the magistracy, the nearer the corporate will comes to
the general will; while, under a single magistrate, the corporate will
is, as I said, merely a particular will. Thus, what may be gained on
one side is lost on the other, and the art of the legislator is to know
how to fix the point at which the force and the will of the government,
which are always in inverse proportion, meet in the relation that is
most to the advantage of the State.




CHAPTER III

THE DIVISION OF GOVERNMENTS


We saw in the last chapter what causes the various kinds or forms of
government to be distinguished according to the number of the members
composing them: it remains in this to discover how the division is made.

In the first place, the Sovereign may commit the charge of the
government to the whole people or to the majority of the people, so
that more citizens are magistrates than are mere private individuals.
This form of government is called _democracy_.

Or it may restrict the government to a small number; so that there are
more private citizens than magistrates; and this is named _aristocracy_.

Lastly, it may concentrate the whole government in the hands of a
single magistrate from whom all others hold their power. This third
form is the most usual, and is called _monarchy_, or royal government.

It should be remarked that all these forms, or at least the first two,
admit of degree, and even of very wide differences; for democracy may
include the whole people, or may be restricted to half. Aristocracy, in
its turn, may be restricted indefinitely from half the people down to
the smallest possible number. Even royalty is susceptible of a measure
of distribution. Sparta always had two kings, as its constitution
provided; and the Roman Empire saw as many as eight emperors at once,
without it being possible to say that the Empire was split up. Thus
there is a point at which each form of government passes into the next,
and it becomes clear that, under three comprehensive denominations,
government is really susceptible of as many diverse forms as the State
has citizens.

There are even more: for, as the government may also, in certain
aspects, be subdivided into other parts, one administered in one
fashion and one in another, the combination of the three forms
may result in a multitude of mixed forms, each of which admits of
multiplication by all the simple forms.

There has been at all times much dispute concerning the best form of
government, without consideration of the fact that each is in some
cases the best, and in others the worst.

If, in the different States, the number of supreme magistrates should
be in inverse ratio to the number of citizens, it follows that,
generally, democratic government suits small States, aristocratic
government those of middle size, and monarchy great ones. This rule
is immediately deducible from the principle laid down. But it is
impossible to count the innumerable circumstances which may furnish
exceptions.




CHAPTER IV

DEMOCRACY


He who makes the law knows better than any one else how it should be
executed and interpreted. It seems then impossible to have a better
constitution than that in which the executive and legislative powers
are united; but this very fact renders the government in certain
respects inadequate, because things which should be distinguished are
confounded, and the prince and the Sovereign, being the same person,
form, so to speak, no more than a government without government.

It is not good for him who makes the laws to execute them, or for the
body of the people to turn its attention away from a general standpoint
and devote it to particular objects. Nothing is more dangerous than
the influence of private interests in public affairs, and the abuse of
the laws by the government is a less evil than the corruption of the
legislator, which is the inevitable sequel to a particular standpoint.
In such a case, the State being altered in substance, all reformation
becomes impossible. A people that would never misuse governmental
powers would never misuse independence; a people that would always
govern well would not need to be governed.

If we take the term in the strict sense, there never has been a real
democracy, and there never will be. It is against the natural order for
the many to govern and the few to be governed. It is unimaginable that
the people should remain continually assembled to devote their time to
public affairs, and it is clear that they cannot set up commissions for
that purpose without the form of administration being changed.

In fact, I can confidently lay down as a principle that, when the
functions of government are shared by several tribunals, the less
numerous sooner or later acquire the greatest authority, if only
because they are in a position to expedite affairs, and power thus
naturally comes into their hands.

Besides, how many conditions that are difficult to unite does such a
government presuppose! First, a very small State, where the people can
readily be got together and where each citizen can with ease know all
the rest; secondly, great simplicity of manners, to prevent business
from multiplying and raising thorny problems; next, a large measure
of equality in rank and fortune, without which equality of rights and
authority cannot long subsist; lastly, little or no luxury--for luxury
either comes of riches or makes them necessary; it corrupts at once
rich and poor, the rich by possession and the poor by covetousness; it
sells the country to softness and vanity, and takes away from the State
all its citizens, to make them slaves one to another, and one and all
to public opinion.

This is why a famous writer has made virtue the fundamental principle
of Republics; for all these conditions could not exist without virtue.
But, for want of the necessary distinctions, that great thinker was
often inexact, and sometimes obscure, and did not see that, the
sovereign authority being everywhere the same, the same principle
should be found in every well-constituted State, in a greater or less
degree, it is true, according to the form of the government.

It may be added that there is no government so subject to civil wars
and intestine agitations as democratic or popular government, because
there is none which has so strong and continual a tendency to change
to another form, or which demands more vigilance and courage for its
maintenance as it is. Under such a constitution above all, the citizen
should arm himself with strength and constancy, and say, every day of
his life, what a virtuous Count Palatine[1] said in the Diet of Poland:
Malo periculosam libertatem quam quietum servitium.

Were there a people of gods, their government would be democratic. So
perfect a government is not for men.


[1] The Palatine of Posen, father of the King of Poland, Duke of
Lorraine. I prefer liberty with danger to peace with slavery.




CHAPTER V

ARISTOCRACY


We have here two quite distinct moral persons, the government and
the Sovereign, and in consequence two general wills, one general in
relation to all the citizens, the other only for the members of the
administration. Thus, although the government may regulate its internal
policy as it pleases, it can never speak to the people save in the
name of the Sovereign, that is, of the people itself, a fact which must
not be forgotten.

The first societies governed themselves aristocratically. The heads
of families took counsel together on public affairs. The young bowed
without question to the authority of experience. Hence such names
as _priests, elders, senate_, and _gerontes_. The savages of North
America govern themselves in this way even now, and their government is
admirable.

But, in proportion as artificial inequality produced by institutions
became predominant over natural inequality, riches or power[1] were put
before age, and aristocracy became elective. Finally, the transmission
of the father's power along with his goods to his children, by creating
patrician families, made government hereditary, and there came to be
senators of twenty.

There are then three sorts of aristocracy--natural, elective and
hereditary. The first is only for simple peoples; the third is the
worst of all governments; the second is the best, and is aristocracy
properly so called.

Besides the advantage that lies in the distinction between the two
powers, it presents that of its members being chosen; for, in popular
government, all the citizens are born magistrates; but here magistracy
is confined to a few, who become such only by election.[2] By this
means uprightness, understanding, experience and all other claims to
pre-eminence and public esteem become so many further guarantees of
wise government.

Moreover, assemblies are more easily held, affairs better discussed and
carried out with more order and diligence, and the credit of the State
is better sustained abroad by venerable senators than by a multitude
that is unknown or despised.

In a word, it is the best and most natural arrangement that the wisest
should govern the many, when it is assured that they will govern
for its profit, and not for their own. There is no need to multiply
instruments, or get twenty thousand men to do what a hundred picked men
can do even better, but it must not be forgotten mat corporate interest
here begins to direct the public power less under the regulation of the
general will, and that a further inevitable propensity takes away from
the laws part of the executive power.

If we are to speak of what is individually desirable, neither should
the State be so small, nor a people so simple and upright, that the
execution of the laws follows immediately from the public will, as
it does in a good democracy. Nor should the nation be so great that
the rulers have to scatter in order to govern it and are able to play
the Sovereign each in his own department, and, beginning by making
themselves independent, end by becoming masters.

But if aristocracy does not demand all the virtues needed by popular
government, it demands others which are peculiar to itself; for
instance, moderation on the side of the rich and contentment on that
of the poor; for it seems that thorough-going equality would be out of
place, as it was not found even at Sparta.

Furthermore, if this form of government carries with it a certain
inequality of fortune, this is justifiable in order that as a rule the
administration of public affairs may be entrusted to those who are most
able to give them their whole time, but not, as Aristotle maintains, in
order that the rich may always be put first. On the contrary, it is of
importance that an opposite choice should occasionally teach the people
that the deserts of men offer claims to pre-eminence more important
than those of riches.


[1] It is clear that the word _optimates_ meant, among the ancients,
not the best, but the most powerful.

[2] It is of great importance that the form of the election of
magistrates should be regulated by law; for if it is left at the
discretion of the prince, it is impossible to avoid falling into
hereditary aristocracy, as the Republics of Venice and Berne actually
did. The first of these has therefore long been a State dissolved; the
second, however, is maintained by the extreme wisdom of the senate, and
forms an honourable and highly dangerous exception.




CHAPTER VI

MONARCHY


So far, we have considered the prince as a moral and collective person,
unified by the force of the laws, and the depositary in the State of
the executive power. We have now to consider this power when it is
gathered together into the hands of a natural person, a real man, who
alone has the right to dispose of it in accordance with the laws. Such
a person is called a monarch or king.

In contrast with other forms of administration, in which a collective
being stands for an individual, in this form an individual stands for a
collective being; so that the moral unity that constituted the prince
is at the same time a physical unity, and all the qualities, which in
the other case are only with difficulty brought together by the law,
are found naturally united.

Thus the will of the people, the will of the prince, the public force
of the State, and the particular force of the government, all answer to
a single motive power; all the springs of the machine are in the same
hands, the whole moves towards the same end; there are no conflicting
movements to cancel one another, and no kind of constitution can be
imagined in which a less amount of effort produces a more considerable
amount of action. Archimedes, seated quietly on the bank and easily
drawing a great vessel afloat, stands to my mind for a skilful monarch,
governing vast states from his study, and moving everything while he
seems himself unmoved.

But if no government is more vigorous than this, there is also none
in which the particular will holds more sway and rules the rest more
easily. Everything moves towards the same end indeed, but this end is
by no means that of the public happiness, and even the force of the
administration constantly shows itself prejudicial to the State.

Kings desire to be absolute, and men are always crying out to them
from afar that the best means of being so is to get themselves loved
by their people. This precept is all very well, and even in some
respects very true. Unfortunately, it will always be derided at court.
The power which comes of a people's love is no doubt the greatest; but
it is precarious and conditional, and princes will never rest content
with it. The best kings desire to be in a position to be wicked, if
they please, without forfeiting their mastery: political sermonisers
may tell them to their hearts' content that, the people's strength
being their own, their first interest is that the people should be
prosperous, numerous and formidable; they are well aware that this
is Untrue. Their first personal interest is that the people should
be weak, wretched, and unable to resist them. I admit that, provided
the subjects remained always in submission, the prince's interest
would indeed be that it should be powerful, in order that its power,
being his own, might make him formidable to his neighbours; but, this
interest being merely secondary and subordinate, and strength being
incompatible with submission, princes naturally give the preference
always to the principle that is more to their immediate advantage. This
is what Samuel put strongly before the Hebrews, and what Macchiavelli
has clearly shown. He professed to teach kings; but it was the people
he really taught. His _Prince_ is the book of Republicans.[1]

We found, on general grounds, that monarchy is suitable only for
great States, and this is confirmed when we examine it in itself.
The more numerous the public administration, the smaller becomes the
relation between the prince and the subjects, and the nearer it comes
to equality, so that in democracy the ratio is unity, or absolute
equality. Again, as the government is restricted in numbers the ratio
increases and reaches its _maximum_ when the government is in the hands
of a single person. There is then too great a distance between prince
and people and the State lacks a bond of union. To form such a bond,
there must be intermediate orders, and princes, personages and nobility
to compose them. But no such things suit a small State, to which all
class differences mean ruin.

If, however, it is hard for a great State to be well governed, it is
much harder for it to be so by a single man; and every one knows what
happens when kings substitute others for themselves.

An essential and inevitable defect, which will always rank monarchical
below republican government, is that in a republic the public voice
hardly ever raises to the highest positions men who are not enlightened
and capable, and such as to fill them with honour; while in monarchies
these who rise to the top are most often merely petty blunderers petty
swindlers, and petty intriguers, whose petty talents cause them to
get into the highest positions at Court, but, as soon as they have
got there, serve only to make their ineptitude clear to the public.
The people is far less often mistaken in its choice than the prince;
and a man of real worth among the king's ministers is almost as rare
as a fool at the head of a republican government. Thus, when, by
some fortunate chance, one of these born governors takes the helm of
State in some monarchy that has been nearly overwhelmed by swarms of
'gentlemanly' administrators, there is nothing but amazement at the
resources he discovers, and his coming marks an era in his country's
history.

For a monarchical State to have a chance of being well governed, its
population and extent must be proportionate to the abilities of its
governor. If is easier to conquer than to rule. With a long enough
lever, the world could be moved with a single finger; to sustain it
needs the shoulders of Hercules. However small a State may be, the
prince is hardly ever big enough for it. When, on the other hand,
it happens that the State is too small for its ruler, in these rare
cases too it is ill governed, because the ruler, constantly pursuing
his great designs, forgets the interests of the people, and makes
it no less wretched by misusing the talents he has, than a ruler of
less capacity would make it for want of those he had not. A kingdom
should, so to speak, expand or contract with each reign, according to
the prince's capabilities; but, the abilities of a senate being more
constant in quantity, the State can then have permanent frontiers
without the administration suffering.

The disadvantage that is most felt in monarchical government is the
want of the continuous succession which, in both the other forms,
provides an unbroken bond of union. When one king dies, another is
needed; elections leave dangerous intervals and are full of storms; and
unless the citizens are disinterested and upright to a degree which
very seldom goes with this kind of government, intrigue and corruption
abound. He to whom the State has sold itself can hardly help selling
it in his turn and repaying himself, at the expense of the weak, the
money the powerful have wrung from him. Under such an administration,
venality sooner or later spreads through every part, and peace so
enjoyed under a king is worse than the disorders of an interregnum.

What has been done to prevent these evils? Crowns have been made
hereditary in certain families, and an order of succession has been
set up, to prevent disputes from arising on the death of kings. That
is to say, the disadvantages of regency have been put in place of
those of election, apparent tranquillity has been preferred to wise
administration, and men have chosen rather to risk having children,
monstrosities, or imbeciles as rulers to having disputes over the
choice of good kings. It has not been taken into account that, in
so exposing ourselves to the risks this possibility entails, we are
setting almost all the chances against us. There was sound sense in
what the younger Dionysius said to his father, who reproached him for
doing some shameful deed by asking, "Did I set you the example?" "No,"
answered his son, "but your father was not king."Everything conspires to take away from a man who is set in authority
over others the sense of justice and reason. Much trouble, we are
told, is taken to teach young princes the art of reigning; but their
education seems to do them no good. It would be better to begin by
teaching them the art of obeying. The greatest kings whose praises
history tells were not brought up to reign: reigning is a science we
are never so far from possessing as when we have learnt too much of
it, and one we acquire better by obeying than by commanding. "Nam
utilissimus idem ac brevissimus bonarum malarumque rerum delectus
cogitare quid aut nolueris sub alio principe, aut volueris."[2]

One result of this lack of coherence is the inconstancy of royal
government, which, regulated now on one scheme and now on another,
according to the character of the reigning prince or those who
reign for him, cannot for long have a fixed object or a consistent
policy--and this variability, not found in the other forms of
government, where the prince is always the same, causes the State to
be always shifting from principle to principle and from project to
project. Thus we may say that generally, if a court is more subtle
in intrigue, there is more wisdom in a senate, and Republics advance
towards their ends by more consistent and better considered policies;
while every revolution in a royal ministry creates a revolution in
the State; for the principle common to all ministers and nearly all
kings is to do in every respect the reverse of what was done by their
predecessors.

This incoherence further clears up a sophism that is very familiar to
royalist political writers; not only is civil government likened to
domestic government, and the prince to the father of a family--this
error has already been refuted--but the prince is also freely credited
with all the virtues he ought to possess, and is supposed to be always
what he should be. This supposition once made, royal government is
clearly preferable to all others, because it is incontestably the
strongest, and, to be the best also, wants only a corporate will more
in conformity with the general will.

But if, according to Plato,[3] the "king by nature" is such a rarity,
how often will nature and fortune conspire to give him a crown? And, if
royal education necessarily corrupts those who receive it, what is to
be hoped from a series of men brought up to reign? It is, then, wanton
self-deception to confuse royal government with government by a good
king. To see such government as it is in itself, we must consider it as
it is under princes who are incompetent or wicked: for either they will
come to the throne wicked or incompetent, or the throne will make them
so.

These difficulties have not escaped our writers, who, all the same,
are not troubled by them. The remedy, they say, is to obey without a
murmur: God sends bad kings in His wrath, and they must be borne as
the scourges of Heaven. Such talk is doubtless edifying; but it would
be more in place in a pulpit than in a political book. What are we to
think of a doctor who promises miracles, and whose whole art is to
exhort the sufferer to patience? We know for ourselves that we must put
up with a bad government when it is there; the question is how to find
a good one.


[1] Macchiavelli was a proper man and a good citizen; but, being
attached to the court of the Medici, he could not help veiling his love
of liberty in the midst of his country's oppression. The choice of his
detestable hero, Cæsar Borgia, clearly enough shows his hidden aim;
and the contradiction between the teaching of the _Prince_ and that of
the _Discourses on Livy_ and the _History of Florence_ shows that this
profound political thinker has so far been studied only by superficial
or corrupt readers. The Court of Rome sternly prohibited his book. I
can well believe it; for it is that Court it most clearly portrays.


[2] Tacitus, _Histories_, i. 16. "For the best, and also the shortest
way of finding out what is good and what is bad is to consider what you
would have wished to happen or not to happen, had another than you been
Emperor."

[3] In the _Politicus_.




CHAPTER VII

MIXED GOVERNMENTS


Strictly speaking, there is no such thing as a simple government. An
isolated ruler must have subordinate magistrates; a popular government
must have a head. There is therefore, in the distribution of the
executive power, always a gradation from the greater to the lesser
number, with the difference that sometimes the greater number is
dependent on the smaller, and sometimes the smaller on the greater.

Sometimes the distribution is equal, when either the constituent parts
are in mutual dependence, as in the government of England, or the
authority of each section is independent, but imperfect, as in Poland.
This last form is bad; for it secures no unity in the government, and
the State is left without a bond of union.

Is a simple or a mixed government the better? Political writers are
always debating the question, which must be answered as we have already
answered a question about all forms of government.

Simple government is better in itself, just because it is simple.
But when the executive power is not sufficiently dependent upon the
legislative power, _i.e._ when the prince is more closely related to
the Sovereign than the people to the prince, this lack of proportion
must be cured by the division of the government; for all the parts have
then no less authority over the subjects, while their division makes
them all together less strong against the Sovereign.

The same disadvantage is also prevented by the appointment of
intermediate magistrates, who leave the government entire, and have
the effect only of balancing the two powers and maintaining their
respective rights. Government is then not mixed, but moderated.

The opposite disadvantages may be similarly cured, and, when the
government is too lax, tribunals may be set up to concentrate it.
This is done in all democracies. In the first case, the government is
divided to make it weak; in the second, to make it strong: for the
_maxima_ of both strength and weakness are found in simple governments,
while the mixed forms result in a mean strength.




CHAPTER VIII

THAT ALL FORMS OF GOVERNMENT DO NOT SUIT ALL COUNTRIES


Liberty not being a fruit of all climates, is not within the reach of
all peoples. The more this principle, laid down by Montesquieu, is
considered, the more its truth is felt; the more it is combated, the
more chance is given to confirm it by new proofs.

In all the governments that there are, the public person consumes
without producing. Whence then does it get what it consumes? From the
labour of its members. The necessities of the public are supplied out
of the superfluities of individuals. It follows that the civil State
can subsist only so long as men's labour brings them a return greater
than their needs.

The amount of this excess is not the same in all countries. In some
it is considerable, in others middling, in yet others nil, in some
even negative. The relation of product to subsistence depends on the
fertility of the climate, on the sort of labour the land demands, on
the nature of its products, on the strength of its inhabitants, on the
greater or less consumption they find necessary, and on several further
considerations of which the whole relation is made up.

On the other side, all governments are not of the same nature: some are
less voracious than others, and the differences between them are based
on this second principle, that the further from their source the public
contributions are removed, the more burdensome they become.

The charge should be measured not by the amount of the impositions, but
by the path they have to travel in order to get back to those from whom
they came. When the circulation is prompt and well-established, it does
not matter whether much or little is paid; the people is always rich
and, financially speaking, all is well. On the contrary, however little
the people gives, if that little does not return to it, it is soon
exhausted by giving continually: the State is then never rich, and the
people is always a people of beggars.

It follows that, the more the distance between people and government
increases, the more burdensome tribute becomes: thus, in a democracy,
the people bears the least charge; in an aristocracy, a greater charge;
and, in monarchy, the weight becomes heaviest. Monarchy therefore suits
only wealthy nations; aristocracy, States of middling size and wealth;
and democracy, States that are small and poor.

In fact, the more we reflect, the more we find the difference between
free and monarchical States to be this: in the former, everything is
used for the public advantage; in the latter, the public forces and
those of individuals are affected by each other, and either increases
as the other grows weak; finally, instead of governing subjects to make
them happy, despotism makes them wretched in order to govern them.

We find then, in every climate, natural causes according to which the
form of government which it requires can be assigned, and we can even
say what sort of inhabitants it should have.

Unfriendly and barren lands, where the product does; not repay the
labour, should remain desert and uncultivated, or peopled only by
savages; lands where men's labour brings in no more than the exact
_minimum_ necessary to subsistence should be inhabited by barbarous
peoples: in such places all polity is impossible. Lands where the
surplus of product over labour is only middling are suitable for free
peoples; those in which the soil is abundant and fertile and gives a
great product for a little labour call for monarchical government,
in order that the surplus of superfluities among the subjects may be
consumed by the luxury of the prince: for it is better for this excess
to be absorbed by the government than dissipated among the individuals.
I am aware that there are exceptions; but these exceptions themselves
confirm the rule, in that sooner or later they produce revolutions
which restore things to the natural order.

General laws should always be distinguished from individual causes that
may modify their effects. If all the South were covered with Republics
and all the North with despotic States, it would be none the less true
that, in point of climate, despotism is suitable to hot countries,
barbarism to cold countries, and good polity to temperate regions. I
see also that, the principle being granted, there may be disputes on
its application; it may be said that there are cold countries that are
very fertile, and tropical countries that are very unproductive. But
this difficulty exists only for those who do not consider the question
in all its aspects. We must, as I have already said, take labour,
strength, consumption, etc., into account.

Take two tracts of equal extent, one of which brings in five and the
other ten. If the inhabitants of the first consume four and those of
the second nine, the surplus of the first product will be a fifth and
that of the second a tenth. The ratio of these two surpluses will then
be inverse to that of the products, and the tract which produces only
five will give a surplus double that of the tract which produces ten.

But there is no question of a double product, and I think no one would
put the fertility of cold countries, as a general rule, on an equality
with that of hot ones. Let us, however, suppose this equality to exist:
let us, if you will, regard England as on the same level as Sicily, and
Poland as Egypt--further south, we shall have Africa and the Indies;
further north, nothing at all. To get this equality of product, what
a difference there must be in tillage: in Sicily, there is only need
to scratch the ground; in England, how men must toil! But, where
more hands are needed to get the same product, the superfluity must
necessarily be less.

Consider, besides, that the same number of men consume much less in
hot countries. The climate requires sobriety for the sake of health;
and Europeans who try to live there as they would at home all perish
of dysentery and indigestion. "We are," says Chardin, "carnivorous
animals, wolves, in comparison with the Asiatics. Some attribute
the sobriety of the Persians to the fact that their country is less
cultivated; but it is my belief that their country abounds less in
commodities because the inhabitants need less. If their frugality," he
goes on, "were the effect of the nakedness of the land, only the poor
would eat little; but everybody does so. Again, less or more would be
eaten in various provinces, according to the land's fertility; but the
same sobriety is found throughout the kingdom. They are very proud of
their manner of life, saying that you have only to look at their hue
to recognise how far it excels that of the Christians. In fact, the
Persians are of an even hue; their skins are fair, fine and smooth;
while the hue of their subjects, the Armenians, who live after the
European fashion, is rough and blotchy, and their bodies are gross and
unwieldy."

The nearer you get to the equator, the less people live on. Meat
they hardly touch; rice, maize, curcur, millet and cassava are
their ordinary food. There are in the Indies millions of men whose
subsistence does not cost a halfpenny a day. Even in Europe we find
considerable differences of appetite between Northern and Southern
peoples. A Spaniard will live for a week on a German's dinner. In the
countries in which men are more voracious, luxury therefore turns
in the direction of consumption. In England, luxury appears in a
well-filled table; in Italy, you feast on sugar and flowers.

Luxury in clothes shows similar differences. In climates in which the
changes of season are prompt and violent, men have better and simpler
clothes; where they clothe themselves only for adornment, what is
striking is more thought of than what is useful; clothes themselves are
then a luxury. At Naples, you may see daily walking in the Pausilippeum
men in gold-embroidered upper garments and nothing else. It is the same
with buildings; magnificence is the sole consideration where there is
nothing to fear from the air. In Paris and London, you desire to be
lodged warmly and comfortably; in Madrid, you have superb salons, but
not a window that closes, and you go to bed in a mere hole.

In hot countries foods are much more substantial and succulent; and
the third difference cannot but have an influence on the second. Why
are so many vegetables eaten in Italy? Because there they are good,
nutritious and excellent in taste. In France, where they are nourished
only on water, they are far from nutritious and are thought nothing of
at table. They take up all the same no less ground, and cost at least
as much pains to cultivate. It is a proved fact that the wheat of
Barbary, in other respects inferior to that of France, yields much more
flour, and that the wheat of France in turn yields more than that of
northern countries; from which it may be inferred that a like gradation
in the same direction, from equator to pole, is found generally. But
is it not an obvious disadvantage for an equal product to contain less
nourishment?

To all these points may be added another, which at once depends on
and strengthens them. Hot countries need inhabitants less than cold
countries, and can support more of them. There is thus a double
surplus, which is all to the advantage of despotism. The greater the
territory occupied by a fixed number of inhabitants, the more difficult
revolt becomes, because rapid or secret concerted action is impossible,
and the government can easily unmask projects and cut communications;
but the more a numerous people is gathered together, the less can
the government usurp the Sovereign's place: the people's leaders can
deliberate as safely in their houses as the prince in council, and
the crowd gathers as rapidly in the squares as the prince's troops in
their quarters. The advantage of tyrannical government therefore lies
in acting at great distances. With the help of the rallying-points
it establishes, its strength, like that of the lever,[1] grows with
distance. The strength of the people, on the other hand, acts only when
concentrated: when spread abroad, it evaporates and is lost, like
powder scattered on the ground, which catches fire only grain by grain.
The least populous countries are thus the fittest for tyranny: fierce
animals reign only in deserts.


[1] This does not contradict what I said before (Book ii, ch. ix) about
the disadvantages of great States; for we were then dealing with the
authority of the government over the members, while here we are dealing
with its force against the subjects. Its scattered members serve it as
rallying-points for action against the people at a distance, but it has
no rallying-point for direct action on its members themselves. Thus the
length of the lever is its weakness in the one case, and its strength
in the other.




CHAPTER IX

THE MARKS OF A GOOD GOVERNMENT


The question "What absolutely is the best government?" is unanswerable
as well as indeterminate; or rather, there are as many good answers as
there are possible combinations in the absolute and relative situations
of all nations.

But if it is asked by what sign we may know that a given people is well
or ill governed, that is another matter, and the question, being one of
fact, admits of an answer.

It is not, however, answered, because every-one wants to answer it in
his own way. Subjects extol public tranquillity, citizens individual
liberty; the one class prefers security of possessions, the other that
of person; the one regards as the best government that which is most
severe, the other maintains that the mildest is the best; the one wants
crimes punished, the other wants them prevented; the one wants the
State to be feared by its neighbours, the other prefers that it should
be ignored; the one is content if money circulates, the other demands
that the people shall have bread. Even if an agreement were come to
on these and similar points, should we have got any further? As moral
qualities do not admit of exact measurement, agreement about the mark
does not mean agreement about the valuation.

For my part, I am continually astonished that a mark so simple is not
recognised, or that men are of so bad faith as not to admit it. What
is the end of political association? The preservation and prosperity
of its members. And what is the surest mark of their preservation and
prosperity? Their numbers and population. Seek then nowhere else this
mark that is in dispute. The rest being equal, the government under
which, without external aids, without naturalisation or colonies, the
citizens increase and multiply most, is beyond question the best.
The government under which a people wanes and diminishes is worst.
Calculators, it is left for you to count, to measure, to compare.[1]


[1] On the same principle it should be judged what centuries deserve
the preference for human prosperity. Those in which letters and arts
have flourished have been too much admired, because the hidden object
of their culture has not been fathomed, and their fatal effects not
taken into account. "Idque apud imperitos humanitas vocabatur, cum
pars servitutis esset." ["Fools called 'humanity' what was a part of
slavery," Tacitus, _Agricola_, 31.] Shall we never see in the maxims
books lay down the vulgar interest that makes their writers speak?
No, whatever they may say, when, despite its renown, a country is
depopulated, it is not true that all is well, and it is not enough that
a poet should have an income of 100,000 francs to make his age the
best of all. Less attention should be paid to the apparent repose and
tranquillity of the rulers than to the well-being of their nations as
wholes, and above all of the most numerous States. A hail-storm lays
several cantons waste, but it rarely makes a famine. Outbreaks and
civil wars give rulers rude shocks, but they are not the real ills of
peoples, who may even get a respite, while there is a dispute as to who
shall tyrannise over them. Their true prosperity and calamities come
from their permanent condition: it is when the whole remains crushed
beneath the yoke, that decay sets in, and that the rulers destroy
them at will, and "ubi solitudinem faciunt, pacem appellant" ["Where
they create solitude, they call it peace," Tacitus, _Agricola_, 31.]
When the bickerings of the great disturbed the kingdom of France, and
the Coadjutor of Paris took a dagger in his pocket to the Parliament,
these things did not prevent the people of France from prospering and
multiplying in dignity, ease and freedom. Long ago Greece flourished
in the midst of the most savage wars; blood ran in torrents, and yet
the whole country was covered with inhabitants. It appeared, says
Macchiavelli, that in the midst of murder, proscription and civil war,
our republic only throve: the virtue, morality and independence of the
citizens did more to strengthen it than all their dissensions had done
to enfeeble it A little disturbance gives the soul elasticity; what
makes the race truly prosperous is not so much peace as liberty.




CHAPTER X

THE ABUSE OF GOVERNMENT AND ITS TENDENCY TO DEGENERATE


As the particular will acts constantly in opposition to the general
will, the government continually exerts itself against the Sovereignty.
The greater this exertion becomes, the more the constitution changes;
and, as there is in this case no other corporate will to create an
equilibrium by resisting the will of the prince, sooner or later the
prince must inevitably suppress the Sovereign and break the social
treaty. This is the unavoidable and inherent defect which, from the
very birth of the body politic, tends ceaselessly to destroy it, as age
and death end by destroying the human body.

There are two general courses by which government degenerates: _i.e._
when it undergoes contraction, or when the State is dissolved.

Government undergoes contraction when it passes from the many to the
few, that is, from democracy to aristocracy, and from aristocracy to
royalty. To do so is its natural propensity.[1] If it took the backward
course from the few to the many, it could be said that it was relaxed;
by this inverse sequence is impossible.

Indeed, governments never change their form except when their energy
is exhausted and leaves them too weak to keep what they have. If a
government at once extended its sphere and relaxed its stringency, its
force would become absolutely nil, and it would persist still less. It
is therefore necessary to wind up the spring and tighten the hold as it
gives way: or else the State it sustains will come to grief.

The dissolution of the State may come about in either of two ways.

First, when the prince ceases to administer the State in accordance
with the laws, and usurps the Sovereign power. A remarkable change then
occurs: not the government, but the State, undergoes contraction; I
mean that the great State is dissolved, and another is formed within
it, composed solely of the members of the government, which becomes for
the rest of the people merely master and tyrant. So that the moment the
government usurps the Sovereignty, the social compact is broken and
all private citizens recover by right their natural liberty, and are
forced, but not bound, to obey.

The same thing happens when the members of the government severally
usurp the power they should exercise only as a body; this is as great
an infraction of the laws, and results in even greater disorders. There
are then, so to speak, as many princes as there are magistrates, and
the State, no less divided than the government, either perishes or
changes its form.

When the State is dissolved, the abuse of government, whatever it
is, bears the common name of _anarchy_. To distinguish, democracy
degenerates into _ochlocracy_ and aristocracy into _oligarchy_ and I
would add that royalty degenerates into _tyranny_; but this last word
is ambiguous and needs explanation.

In vulgar usage, a tyrant is a king who governs violently and without
regard for justice and law. In the exact sense, a tyrant is an
individual who arrogates to himself the royal authority without having
a right to it. This is how the Greeks understood the word "tyrant":
they applied it indifferently to good and bad princes whose authority
was not legitimate.[2] _Tyrant_ and _usurper_ are thus perfectly
synonymous terms.

In order that I may give different things different names, I call
him who usurps the royal authority _tyrant_, and him who usurps the
sovereign power a _despot_. The tyrant is he who thrusts himself in
contrary to the laws to govern in accordance with the laws; the despot
is he who sets himself above the laws themselves. Thus the tyrant
cannot be a despot, but the despot is always a tyrant.


[1] The slow formation and the progress of the Republic of Venice in
its lagoons are a notable instance of this sequence; and it is most
astonishing that, after more than twelve hundred years' existence, the
Venetians seem to be still at the second stage, which they reached with
the _Serrar di Consiglio_ in 1198. As for the ancient Dukes who are
brought up against them, it is proved, whatever the _Squittinio della
libertà veneta_ may say of them, that they were in no sense Sovereigns.

A case certain to be cited against my view is that of the Roman
Republic, which, it will be said, followed exactly the opposite course,
and passed from monarchy to aristocracy and from aristocracy to
democracy. I by no means take this view of it.

What Romulus first set up was a mixed government, which soon
deteriorated into despotism. From special causes, the State died an
untimely death, as new-born children sometimes perish without reaching
manhood. The expulsion of the Tarquins was the real period of the birth
of the Republic. But at first it took on no constant form, because,
by not abolishing the patriciate, it left half its work undone. For,
by this means, hereditary aristocracy, the worst of all legitimate
forms of administration, remained in conflict with democracy, and the
form of the government, as Macchiavelli has proved, was only fixed
on the establishment of the tribunate: only then was there a true
government and a veritable democracy. In fact, the people was then not
only Sovereign, but also magistrate and judge; the senate was only a
subordinate tribunal, to temper and concentrate the government, and the
consuls themselves, though they were patricians, first magistrates, and
absolute generals in war, were in Rome itself no more than presidents
of the people.

From that point, the government followed its natural tendency,
and inclined strongly to aristocracy. The patriciate, we may say,
abolished itself, and the aristocracy was found no longer in the body
of patricians as at Venice and Genoa, but in the body of the senate,
which was composed of patricians and plebeians, and even in the body
of tribunes when they began to usurp an active function: for names do
not affect facts, and, when the people has rulers who govern for it,
whatever name they bear, the government is an aristocracy.

The abuse of aristocracy led to the civil wars and the triumvirate.
Sulla, Julius Cæsar and Augustus became in fact real monarchs; and
finally, under the despotism of Tiberius, the State was dissolved.
Roman history then confirms, instead of invalidating, the principle I
have laid down.

[2] Omnes enim et habentur et dicuntur tyranni, qui potestate utuntur
perpetua in ea civitate quæ libertate usa est (Cornelius Nepos, _Life
of Miltiades_). [For all those are called and considered tyrants,
who hold perpetual power in a State that has known liberty.] It is
true that Aristotle (_Nicomachean Ethics_, Book viii, chapter x)
distinguishes the tyrant from the king by the fact that the former
governs in his own interest, and the latter only for the good of his
subjects; but not only did all Greek authors in general use the word
_tyrant_ in a different sense, as appears most clearly in Xenophon's
_Hiero_, but also it would follow from Aristotle's distinction that,
from the very beginning of the world, there has not yet been a single
king.




CHAPTER XI

THE DEATH OF THE BODY POLITIC


Such is the natural and inevitable tendency of the best constituted
governments. If Sparta and Rome perished, what State can hope to endure
for ever? If we would set up a long-lived form of government, let us
not even dream of making it eternal. If we are to succeed, we must not
attempt the impossible, or flatter ourselves that we are endowing the
work of man with a stability of which human conditions do not permit.

The body politic, as well as the human body, begins to die as soon as
it is born, and carries in itself the causes of its destruction. But
both may have a constitution that is more or less robust and suited to
preserve them a longer or a shorter time. The constitution of man is
the work of nature; that of the State the work of art. It is not in
men's power to prolong their own lives; but it is for them to prolong
as much as possible the life of the State, by giving it the best
possible constitution. The best constituted State will have an end;
but it will end later than any other, unless some unforeseen accident
brings about its untimely destruction.

The life-principle of the body politic lies in the sovereign authority.
The legislative power is the heart of the State; the executive power
is its brain, which causes the movement of all the parts. The brain
may become paralysed and the individual still live. A man may remain
an imbecile and live; but as soon as the heart ceases to perform its
functions, the animal is dead.

The State subsists by means not of the laws, but of the legislative
power. Yesterday's law is not binding to-day; but silence is taken for
tacit consent, and the Sovereign is held to confirm incessantly the
laws it does not abrogate as it might. All that it has once declared
itself to will it wills always, unless it revokes its declaration.

Why then is so much respect paid to old laws? For this very reason. We
must believe that nothing but the excellence of old acts of will can
have preserved them so long: if the Sovereign had not recognised them
as throughout salutary, it would have revoked them a thousand times.
This is why, so far from growing weak, the laws continually gain new
strength in any well constituted State; the precedent of antiquity
makes them daily more venerable: while wherever the laws grow weak as
they become old, this proves that there is no longer a legislative
power, and that the State is dead.




CHAPTER XII

HOW THE SOVEREIGN AUTHORITY MAINTAINS ITSELF


The Sovereign, having no force other than the legislative power, acts
only by means of the laws; and the laws being solely the authentic acts
of the general will, the Sovereign cannot act save when the people is
assembled. The people in assembly, I shall be told, is a mere chimera.
It is so to-day, but two thousand years ago it was not so. Has man's
nature changed?

The bounds of possibility, in moral matters, are less narrow than
we imagine: it is our weaknesses, our vices and our prejudices that
confine them. Base souls have no belief in great men; vile slaves smile
in mockery at the name of liberty.

Let us judge of what can be done by what has been done. I shall say
nothing of the Republics of ancient Greece; but the Roman Republic was,
to my mind, a great State, and the town of Rome a great town. The last
census showed that there were in Rome four hundred thousand citizens
capable of bearing arms, and the last computation of the population
of the Empire showed over four million citizens, excluding subjects,
foreigners, women, children and slaves.

What difficulties might not be supposed to stand in the way of the
frequent assemblage of the vast population of this capital and its
neighbourhood. Yet few weeks passed without the Roman people being in
assembly, and even being so several times. It exercised not only the
rights of Sovereignty, but also a part of those of government. It dealt
with certain matters, and judged certain cases, and this whole people
was found in the public meeting-place hardly less often as magistrates
than as citizens.

If we went back to the earliest history of nations, we should find that
most ancient governments, even those of monarchical form, such as the
Macedonian and the Frankish, had similar councils. In any case, the one
incontestable fact I have given is an answer to all difficulties; it is
good logic to reason from the actual to the possible.




CHAPTER XIII

THE SAME (_continued_)


It is not enough for the assembled people to have once fixed the
constitution of the State by giving its sanction to a body of law;
it is not enough for it to have set up a perpetual government, or
provided once for all for the election of magistrates. Besides the
extraordinary assemblies unforeseen circumstances may demand, there
must be fixed periodical assemblies which cannot be abrogated or
prorogued, so that on the proper day the people is legitimately called
together by law, without need of any formal summoning.

But, apart from these assemblies authorised by their date alone, every
assembly of the people not summoned by the magistrates appointed for
that purpose, and in accordance with the prescribed forms, should be
regarded as unlawful, and all its acts as null and void, because the
command to assemble should itself proceed from the law.

The greater or less frequency with which lawful assemblies should occur
depends on so many considerations that no exact rules about them can be
given. It can only be said generally that the stronger the government
the more often should the Sovereign show itself.

This, I shall be told, may do for a single town; but what is to be
done when the State includes several? Is the sovereign authority to be
divided? Or is it to be concentrated in a single town to which all the
rest are made subject?

Neither the one nor the other, I reply. First, the sovereign authority
is one and simple, and cannot be divided without being destroyed. In th
second place, one town cannot, any more than one nation, legitimately
be made subject to another, because the essence of the body politic
lies in the reconciliation of obedience and liberty, and the words
subject and Sovereign are identical correlatives the idea of which
meets in the single word "citizen."

I answer further that the union of several towns in a single city is
always bad, and that, if we wish to make such a union, we should not
expect to avoid its natural disadvantages. It is useless to bring up
abuses that belong to great States against one who desires to see only
small ones; but how can small States be given the strength to resist
great ones, as formerly the Greek towns resisted the Great King, and
more recently Holland and Switzerland have resisted the House of
Austria?

Nevertheless, if the State cannot be reduced to the right limits, there
remains still one resource; this is, to allow no capital, to make the
seat of government move from town to town, and to assemble by turn in
each the Provincial Estates of the country.

People the territory evenly, extend everywhere the same rights, bear
to every place in it abundance and life: by these means will the State
become at once as strong and as well governed as possible. Remember
that the walls of towns are built of the ruins of the houses of the
countryside. For every palace I see raised in the capital, my mind's
eye sees a whole country made desolate.




CHAPTER XIV

THE SAME (continued)


The moment the people is legitimately assembled as a sovereign body,
the jurisdiction of the government wholly lapses, the executive power
is suspended, and the person of the meanest citizen is as sacred and
inviolable as that of the first magistrate; for in the presence of
the person represented, representatives no longer exist. Most of the
tumults that arose in the comitia at Rome were due to ignorance or
neglect of this rule. The consuls were in them merely the presidents of
the people; the tribunes were mere speakers;[1] the senate was nothing
at all.

These intervals of suspension, during which the prince recognises or
ought to recognise an actual superior, have always been viewed by him
with alarm; and these assemblies of the people, which are the aegis
of the body politic and the curb on the government, have at all times
been the horror of rulers: who therefore never spare pains, objections,
difficulties, and promises, to stop the citizens from having them. When
the citizens are greedy, cowardly, and pusillanimous, and love ease
more than liberty, they do not long hold out against the redoubled
efforts of the government; and thus, as the resisting force incessantly
grows, the sovereign authority ends by disappearing, and most cities
fall and perish before their time.

But between the sovereign authority and arbitrary government there
sometimes intervenes a mean power of which something must be said.


[1] In nearly the same sense as this word has in the English
Parliament. The similarity of these functions would have brought the
consuls and the tribunes into conflict, even had all jurisdiction been
suspended.




CHAPTER XV

DEPUTIES OR REPRESENTATIVES


As soon as public service ceases to be the chief business of the
citizens, and they would rather serve with their money than with their
persons, the State is not far from its fall. When it is necessary
to march out to war, they pay troops and stay at home: when it is
necessary to meet in council, they name deputies and stay at home. By
reason of idleness and money, they end by having soldiers to enslave
their country and representatives to sell it.

It is through the hustle of commerce and the arts, through the greedy
self-interest of profit, and through softness and love of amenities
that personal services are replaced by money payments. Men surrender
a part of their profits in order to have time to increase them at
leisure. Make gifts of money, and you will not be long without chains.
The word _finance_ is a slavish word, unknown in the city-state. In a
country that is truly free, the citizens do everything with their own
arms and nothing by means of money; so far from paying to be exempted
from their duties, they would even pay for the privilege of fulfilling
them themselves. I am far from taking the common view: I hold enforced
labour to be less opposed to liberty than taxes.

The better the constitution of a State is, the more do public affairs
encroach on private in the minds of the citizens. Private affairs are
even of much less importance, because the aggregate of the common
happiness furnishes a greater proportion of that of each individual,
so that there is less for him to seek in particular cares. In a
well-ordered city every man flies to the assemblies: under a bad
government no one cares to stir a step to get to them, because no one
is interested in what happens there, because it is foreseen that the
general will will not prevail, and lastly because domestic cares are
all-absorbing. Good laws lead to the making of better ones; bad ones
bring about worse. As soon as any man says of the affairs of the State
_What does it matter to me?_ the State may be given up for lost.

The lukewarmness of patriotism, the activity of private interest, the
vastness of States, conquest and the abuse of government suggested
the method of having deputies or representatives of the people in
the national assemblies. These are what, in some countries, men have
presumed to call the Third Estate. Thus the individual interest of two
orders is put first and second; the public interest occupies only the
third place.

Sovereignty, for the same reason as makes it inalienable, cannot be
represented; it lies essentially in the general will, and will does not
admit of representation: it is either the same, or other; there is no
intermediate possibility. The deputies of the people, therefore, are
not and cannot be its representatives: they are merely its stewards,
and can carry through no definitive acts. Every law the people has not
ratified in person is null and void--is, in fact, not a law. The people
of England regards itself as free; but it is grossly mistaken; it is
free only during the election of members of parliament. As soon as they
are elected, slavery overtakes it, and it is nothing. The use it makes
of the short moments of liberty it enjoys shows indeed that it deserves
to lose them.

The idea of representation is modern; it comes to us from feudal
government, from that iniquitous and absurd system which degrades
humanity and dishonours the name of man. In ancient republics and even
in monarchies, the people never had representatives; the word itself
was unknown. It is very singular that in Rome, where the tribunes
were so sacrosanct, it was never even imagined that they could usurp
the functions of the people, and that in the midst of so great a
multitude they never attempted to pass on their own authority a single
plebiscitum. We can, however, form an idea of the difficulties caused
sometimes by the people being so numerous, from what happened in the
time of the Gracchi, when some of the citizens had to cast their votes
from the roofs of buildings.

Where right and liberty are everything, disadvantages count for
nothing. Among this wise people everything was given its just value,
its lictors were allowed to do what its tribunes would never have dared
to attempt; for it had no fear that its lictors would try to represent
it.

To explain, however, in what way the tribunes did sometimes represent
it, it is enough to conceive how the government represents the
Sovereign. Law being purely the declaration of the general will, it is
clear that, in the exercise of the legislative power, the people cannot
be represented; but in that of the executive power, which is only the
force that is applied to give the law effect, it both can and should be
represented. We thus see that if we looked closely into the matter we
should find that very few nations have any laws. However that may be,
it is certain that the tribunes, possessing no executive power, could
never represent the Roman people by right of the powers entrusted to
them, but only by usurping those of the senate.

In Greece, all that the people had to do, it did for itself; it was
constantly assembled in the public square. The Greeks lived in a mild
climate; they had no natural greed; slaves did their work for them;
their great concern was with liberty. Lacking the same advantages, how
can you preserve the same rights? Your severer climates add to your
needs;[1] for half the year your public squares are uninhabitable; the
flatness of your languages unfits them for being heard in the open air;
you sacrifice more for profit than for liberty, and fear slavery less
than poverty.

What then? Is liberty maintained only by the help of slavery? It may be
so. Extremes meet. Everything that is not in the course of nature has
its disadvantages, civil society most of all. There are some unhappy
circumstances in which we can only keep our liberty at others' expense,
and where the citizen can be perfectly free only when the slave is most
a slave. Such was the case with Sparta. As for you, modern peoples,
you have no slaves, but you are slaves yourselves; you pay for their
liberty with your own. It is in vain that you boast of this preference;
I find in it more cowardice than humanity.

I do not mean by all this that it is necessary to have slaves, or that
the right of slavery is legitimate: I am merely giving the reasons why
modern peoples, believing themselves to be free, have representatives,
while ancient peoples had none. In any case, the moment a people allows
itself to be represented, it is no longer free: it no longer exists.

All things considered, I do not see that it is possible henceforth for
the Sovereign to preserve among us the exercise of its rights, unless
the city is very small. But if it is very small, it will be conquered?
No. I will show later on how the external strength of a great people[2]
may be combined with the convenient polity and good order of a small
State.


[1] To adopt in cold countries the luxury and effeminacy of the East is
to desire to submit to its chains; it is indeed to bow to them far more
inevitably in our case than in theirs.

[2] I had intended to do this in the sequel to this work, when
in dealing with external relations I came to the subject of
confederations. The subject is quite new, and its principles have still
to be laid down.




CHAPTER XVI

THAT THE INSTITUTION OF GOVERNMENT IS NOT A CONTRACT


The legislative power once well established, the next thing is to
establish similarly the executive power; for this latter, which
operates only by particular acts, not being of the essence of the
former, is naturally separate from it. Were it possible for the
Sovereign, as such, to possess the executive power, right and fact
would be so confounded that no one could tell what was law and what was
not; and the body politic, thus disfigured, would soon fall a prey to
the violence it was instituted to prevent.

As the citizens, by the social contract, are all equal, all can
prescribe what all should do, but no one has a right to demand that
another shall do what he does not do himself. It is strictly this
right, which is indispensable for giving the body politic life and
movement, that the Sovereign, in instituting the government, confers
upon the prince.

It has been held that this act of establishment was a contract between
the people and the rulers it sets over itself.--a contract in which
conditions were laid down between the two parties binding the one to
command and the other to obey. It will be admitted, I am sure, that
this is an odd kind of contract to enter into. But let us see if this
view can be upheld.

First, the supreme authority can no more be modified than it can be
alienated; to limit it is to destroy it. It is absurd and contradictory
for the Sovereign to set a superior over itself; to bind itself to obey
a master would be to return to absolute liberty.

Moreover, it is clear that this contract between the people and such
and such persons would be a particular act; and from this it follows
that it can be neither a law nor an act of Sovereignty, and that
consequently it would be illegitimate.

It is plain too that the contracting parties in relation to each other
would be under the law of nature alone and wholly without guarantees
of their mutual undertakings, a position wholly at variance with the
civil state. He who has force at his command being always in a position
to control execution, it would come to the same thing if the name
"contract" were given to the act of one man who said to another; "I
give you all my goods, on condition that you give me back as much of
them as you please."

There is only one contract in the State, and that is the act of
association, which in itself excludes the existence of a second. It
is impossible to conceive of any public contract that would not be a
violation of the first.




CHAPTER XVII

THE INSTITUTION OF GOVERNMENT


Under what general idea then should the act by which government is
instituted be conceived as falling? I will begin by stating that the
act is complex, as being composed of two others--the establishment' of
the law and its execution.

By the former, the Sovereign decrees that there shall be a governing
body established in this or that form; this act is clearly a law.

By the latter, the people nominates the rulers who are to be entrusted
with the government that has been established. This nomination, being a
particular act, is clearly not a second law, but merely a consequence
of the first and a function of government.

The difficulty is to understand how there can be a governmental act
before government exists, and how the people, which is only Sovereign
or subject, can, under certain circumstances, become a prince or
magistrate.

It is at this point that there is revealed one of the astonishing
properties of the body politic, by means of which it reconciles
apparently contradictory operations; for this is accomplished by a
sudden conversion of Sovereignty into democracy, so that, without
sensible change, and merely by virtue of a new relation of all to all,
the citizens become magistrates and pass from general to particular
acts, from legislation to the execution of the law.

This changed relation is no speculative subtlety without instances
in practice: it happens every day in the English Parliament, where,
on certain occasions, the Lower House resolves itself into Grand
Committee, for the better discussion of affairs, and thus, from being
at one moment a sovereign court, becomes at the next a mere commission;
so that subsequently it reports to itself, as House of Commons, the
result of its proceedings in Grand Committee, and debates over again
under one name what it has already settled under another.

It is, indeed, the peculiar advantage of democratic government that it
can be established in actuality by a simple act of the general will.
Subsequently, this provisional government remains in power, if this
form is adopted, or else establishes in the name of the Sovereign the
government that is prescribed by law; and thus the whole proceeding
is regular. It is impossible to set up government in any other manner
legitimately and in accordance with the principles so far laid down.




CHAPTER XVIII

HOW TO CHECK THE USURPATIONS OF GOVERNMENT


What we have just said confirms Chapter XVI, and makes it clear that
the institution of government is not a contract, but a law; that the
depositaries of the executive power are not the people's masters, but
its officers; that it can set them up and pull them down when it likes;
that for them there is no question of contract, but of obedience; and
that in taking charge of the functions the State imposes on them they
are doing no more than fulfilling their duty as citizens, without
having the remotest right to argue about the conditions.

When therefore the people sets up an hereditary government, whether
it be monarchical and confined to one family, or aristocratic and
confined to a class, what it enters into is not an undertaking; the
administration is given a provisional form, until the people chooses to
order it otherwise.

It is true that such changes are always dangerous, and that the
established government should never be touched except when it comes
to be incompatible with the public good; but the circumspection this
involves is a maxim of policy and not a rule of right, and the State is
no more bound to leave civil authority in the hands of its rulers than
military authority in the hands of its generals.

It is also true that it is impossible to be too careful to observe,
in such cases, all the formalities necessary to distinguish a regular
and legitimate act from a seditious tumult, and the will of a whole
people from the clamour of a faction. Here above all no further
concession should be made to the untoward possibility than cannot, in
the strictest logic, be refused it. From this obligation the prince
derives a great advantage in preserving his power despite the people,
without it being possible to say he has usurped it; for, seeming to
avail himself only of his rights, he finds it very easy to extend them,
and to prevent, under the pretext of keeping the peace, assemblies that
are destined to the re-establishment of order; with the result that he
takes advantage of a silence he does not allow to be broken, or of
irregularities he causes to be committed, to assume that he has the
support of those whom fear prevents from speaking, and to punish those
who dare to speak. Thus it was that the decemvirs, first elected for
one year and then kept on in office for a second, tried to perpetuate
their power by forbidding the comitia to assemble; and by this easy
method every government in the world, once clothed with the public
power, sooner or later usurps the sovereign authority.

The periodical assemblies of which I have already spoken are designed
to prevent or postpone this calamity, above all when they need no
formal summoning; for in that case, the prince cannot stop them without
openly declaring himself a law-breaker and an enemy of the State.

The opening of these assemblies, whose sole object is the maintenance
of the social treaty, should always take the form of putting two
propositions that may not be suppressed, which should be voted on
separately.

The first is: "Does it please the Sovereign to preserve the present
form of government?"

The second is: "Does it please the people to leave its administration
in the hands of those who are actually in charge of it?"

I am here assuming what I think I have shown; that there is in the
State no fundamental law that cannot be revoked, not excluding the
social compact itself; for if all the citizens assembled of one accord
to break the compact, it is impossible to doubt that it would be very
legitimately broken. Grotius even thinks that each man can renounce his
membership of his own State, and recover his natural liberty and his
goods on leaving the country.[1] It would be indeed absurd if all the
citizens in assembly could not do what each can do by himself.


[1] Provided, of course, he does not leave to escape his obligations
and avoid having to serve his country in the hour of need. Flight
in such a case would be criminal and punishable, and would be, not
withdrawal, but desertion.




BOOK IV

CHAPTER I

THAT THE GENERAL WILL IS INDESTRUCTIBLE


As long as several men in assembly regard themselves as a single body,
they have only a single will which is concerned with their common
preservation and general well-being. In this case, all the springs of
the State are vigorous and simple and its rules clear and luminous;
there are no embroilments or conflicts of interests; the common good is
everywhere clearly apparent, and only good sense is needed to perceive
it. Peace, unity and equality are the enemies of political subtleties.
Men who are upright and simple are difficult to deceive because of
their simplicity; lures and ingenious pretexts fail to impose upon
them, and they are not even subtle enough to be dupes. When, among the
happiest people in the world, bands of peasants are seen regulating
affairs of State under an oak, and always acting wisely, can we help
scorning the ingenious methods of other nations, which make themselves
illustrious and wretched with so much art and mystery?

A State so governed needs very few laws; and, as it becomes necessary
to issue new ones, the necessity is universally seen. The first man to
propose them merely says what all have already felt, and there is no
question of factions or intrigues or eloquence in order to secure the
passage into law of what every one has already decided to do, as soon
as he is sure that the rest will act with him.

Theorists are led into error because, seeing only States that have
been from the beginning wrongly constituted, they are struck by the
impossibility of applying such a policy to them. They make great game
of all the absurdities a clever rascal or an insinuating speaker might
get the people of Paris or London to believe. They do not know that
Cromwell would have been put to "the bells" by the people of Berne, and
the Due de Beaufort on the treadmill by the Genevese.

But when the social bond begins to be relaxed and the State to grow
weak, when particular interests begin to make themselves felt and the
smaller societies to exercise an influence over the larger, the common
interest changes and finds opponents: opinion is no longer unanimous;
the general will ceases to be the will of all; contradictory views and
debates arise; and the best advice is not taken without question.

Finally, when the State, on the eve of ruin, maintains only a vain,
illusory and formal existence, when in every heart the social bond
is broken, and the meanest interest brazenly lays hold of the sacred
name of "public good," the general will becomes mute: all men, guided
by secret motives, no more give their views as citizens than if the
State had never been; and iniquitous decrees directed solely to private
interest get passed under the name of laws.

Does it follow from this that the general will is exterminated or
corrupted? Not at all: it is always constant, unalterable and pure; but
it is subordinated to other wills which encroach upon its sphere. Each
man, in detaching, his interest from the common interest, sees clearly
that he cannot entirely separate them; but his share in the public
mishaps seems to him negligible beside the exclusive good he aims at
making his own. Apart from this particular good, he wills the general
good in his own interest, as strongly as any one else. Even in selling
his vote for money, he does not extinguish in himself the general
will, but only eludes it. The fault he commits is that of changing the
state of the question, and answering something different from what he
is asked. Instead of saying, by his vote, "It is to the advantage of
the State," he says, "It is of advantage to this or that man or party
that this or that view should prevail." Thus the law of public order
in assemblies is not so much to maintain in them the general will as
to secure that the question be always put to it, and the answer always
given by it.

I could here set down many reflections on the simple right of voting
in every act of Sovereignty--a right which no-one can take from the
citizens--and also on the right of stating views, making proposals,
dividing and discussing, which the government is always most careful
to leave solely to its members; but this important subject would need a
treatise to itself, and it is impossible to say everything in a single
work.




CHAPTER II

VOTING


It may be seen, from the last chapter, that the way in which general
business is managed may give a clear enough indication of the actual
state of morals and the health of the body politic. The more concert
reigns in the assemblies, that is, the nearer opinion approaches
unanimity, the greater is the dominance of the general will. On
the other hand, long debates, dissensions and tumult proclaim the
ascendancy of particular interests and the decline of the State.

This seems less clear when two or more orders enter into the
constitution, as patricians and plebeians did at Rome; for quarrels
between these two orders often disturbed the comitia, even in the best
days of the Republic. But the exception is rather apparent than real;
for then, through the defect that is inherent in the body politic,
there were, so to speak, two States in one, and what is not true of
the two together is true of either separately. Indeed, even in the
most stormy times, the plebiscita of the people, when the Senate did
not interfere with them, always went through quietly and by large
majorities. The citizens having but one interest, the people had but a
single will.

At the other extremity of the circle, unanimity recurs; this is the
case when the citizens, having fallen into servitude, have lost both
liberty and will. Fear and flattery then change votes into acclamation;
deliberation ceases, and only worship or malediction is left. Such
was the vile manner in which the senate expressed its views under the
Emperors. It did so sometimes with absurd precautions. Tacitus observes
that, under Otho, the senators, while they heaped curses on Vitellius,
contrived at the same time to make a deafening noise, in order that,
should he ever become their master, he might not know what each of them
had said.

On these various considerations depend the rules by which the methods
of counting votes and comparing opinions should be regulated, according
as the general will is more or less easy to discover, and the State
more or less in its decline.

There is but one law which, from its nature, needs unanimous consent.
This is the social compact; for civil association is the most voluntary
of all acts. Every man being born free and his own master, no-one,
under any pretext whatsoever, can make any man subject without his
consent. To decide that the son of a slave is born a slave is to decide
that he is not born a man.

If then there are opponents when the social compact is made, their
opposition does not invalidate the contract, but merely prevents them
from being included in it. They are foreigners among citizens. When the
State is instituted, residence constitutes consent; to dwell within its
territory is to submit to the Sovereign.[1]

Apart from this primitive contract, the vote of the majority always
binds all the rest. This follows from the contract itself. But it is
asked how a man can be both free and forced to conform to wills that
are not his own. How are the opponents at once free and subject to laws
they have not agreed to?

I retort that the question is wrongly put. The citizen gives his
consent to all the laws, including those which are passed in spite of
his opposition, and even those which punish him when he dares to break
any of them. The constant will of all the members of the State is the
general will; by virtue of it they are citizens and free.[2] When in
the popular assembly a law is proposed, what the people is asked is not
exactly whether it approves or rejects the proposal, but whether it is
in conformity with the general will, which is their will. Each man, in
giving his vote, states his opinion on that point; and the general will
is found by counting votes. When therefore the opinion that is contrary
to my own prevails, this proves neither more nor less than that I was
mistaken, and that what I thought to be the general will was not so. If
my particular opinion had carried the day I should have achieved the
opposite of what was my will and it is in that case that I should not
have been free.

This presupposes, indeed, that all the qualities of the general will
still reside in the majority: when they cease to do so, whatever side a
man may take, liberty is no longer possible.

In my earlier demonstration of how particular wills are substituted
for the general will in public deliberation, I have adequately pointed
out the practicable methods of avoiding this abuse; and I shall have
more to say of them later on. I have also given the principles for
determining the proportional number of votes for declaring that will.
A difference of one vote destroys equality; a single opponent destroys
unanimity; but between equality and unanimity, there are several grades
of unequal division, at each of which this proportion may be fixed in
accordance with the condition and the needs of the body politic.

There are two general rules that may serve to regulate this relation.
First, the more grave and important the questions discussed, the nearer
should the opinion that is to prevail approach unanimity. Secondly, the
more the matter in hand calls for speed, the smaller the prescribed
difference in the numbers of votes may be allowed to become: where an
instant decision has to be reached, a majority of one vote should be
enough. The first of these two rules seems more in harmony with the
laws, and the second with practical affairs. In any case, it is the
combination of them that gives the best proportions for determining the
majority necessary.


[1] This should of course be understood as applying to a free State;
for elsewhere family, goods, lack of a refuge, necessity, or violence
may detain a man in a country against his will; and then his dwelling
there no longer by itself implies his consent to the contract or to its
violation.

[2] At Genoa, the word _Liberty_ may be read over the front of the
prisons and on the chains of the galley-slaves. This application of the
device is good and just It is indeed only malefactors of all estates
who prevent the citizen from being free. In the country in which
all such men were in the galleys, the most perfect liberty would be
enjoyed.




CHAPTER III

ELECTIONS


In the elections of the prince and the magistrates, which are, as I
have said, complex acts, there are two possible methods of procedure,
choice and lot. Both have been employed in various republics, and a
highly complicated mixture of the two still survives in the election of
the Doge at Venice.

"Election by lot," says Montesquieu, "is democratic in nature." I agree
that it is so; but in what sense? "The lot," he goes on, "is a way
of making choice that is unfair to nobody; it leaves each citizen a
reasonable hope of serving his country." These are not reasons.

If we bear in mind that the election of rulers is a function of
government, and not of Sovereignty, we shall see why the lot is the
method more natural to democracy, in which the administration is better
in proportion as the number of its acts is small.

In every real democracy, magistracy is not an advantage, but a
burdensome charge which cannot justly be imposed on one individual
rather than another. The law alone can lay the charge on him on whom
the lot falls. For, the conditions being then the same for all, and
the choice not depending on any human will, there is no particular
application to alter the universality of the law.

In an aristocracy, the prince chooses the prince, the government is
preserved by itself, and voting is rightly ordered.

The instance of the election of the Doge of Venice confirms, instead
of destroying, this distinction; the mixed form suits a mixed
government. For it is an error to take the government of Venice for a
real aristocracy. If the people has no share in the government, the
nobility is itself the people. A host of poor Barnabotes never gets
near any magistracy, and its nobility consists merely in the empty
title of Excellency, and in the right to sit in the Great Council. As
this Great Council is as numerous as our General Council at Geneva, its
illustrious members have no more privileges than our plain citizens.
It is indisputable that, apart from the extreme disparity between the
two republics, the _bourgeoisie_ of Geneva is exactly equivalent to the
_patriciate_ of Venice; our _natives_ and _inhabitants_ correspond to
the _townsmen_ and the _people_ of Venice; our _peasants_ correspond
to the _subjects_ on the mainland; and, however that republic be
regarded, if its size be left out of account, its government is no more
aristocratic than our own. The whole difference is that, having no
life-ruler, we do not, like Venice, need to use the lot.

Election by lot would have few disadvantages in a real democracy, in
which, as equality would everywhere exist in morals and talents as
well as in principles and fortunes, it would become almost a matter
of indifference who was chosen. But I have already said that a real
democracy is only an ideal.

When choice and lot are combined, positions that require special
talents, such as military posts, should be filled by the former; the
latter does for cases, such as judicial offices, in which good sense,
justice, and integrity are enough, because in a State that is well
constituted, these qualities are common to all the citizens.

Neither lot nor vote has any place in monarchical government. The
monarch being by right sole prince and only magistrate, the choice of
his lieutenants belongs to none but him. When the Abbé de Saint-Pierre
proposed that the Councils of the King of France should be multiplied,
and their members elected by ballot, he did not see that he was
proposing to change the form of government.

I should now speak of the methods of giving and counting opinions in
the assembly of the people; but perhaps an account of this aspect of
the Roman constitution will more forcibly illustrate all the rules I
could lay down. It is worth the while of a judicious reader to follow
in some detail the working of public and private affairs in a Council
consisting of two hundred thousand men.




CHAPTER IV

THE ROMAN COMITIA


We are without well-certified records of the first period of Rome's
existence; it even appears very probable that most of the stories told
about it are fables; indeed, generally speaking, the most instructive
part of the history of peoples, that which deals with their foundation,
is what we have least of. Experience teaches us every day what causes
lead to the revolutions of empires; but, as no new peoples are now
formed, we have almost nothing beyond conjecture to go upon in
explaining how they were created.

The customs we find established show at least that these customs had
an origin. The traditions that go back to those origins, that have
the greatest authorities behind them, and that are confirmed by the
strongest proofs, should pass for the most certain. These are the rules
I have tried to follow in inquiring how the freest and most powerful
people on earth exercised its supreme power.

After the foundation of Rome, the new-born republic, that is, the
army of its founder, composed of Albans, Sabines and foreigners, was
divided into three classes, which, from this division, took the name
of _tribes_. Each of these tribes was subdivided into ten _curiæ_, and
each _curia_ into _decuriæ_, headed by leaders called _curiones_ and
_decuriones_.

Besides this, out of each tribe was taken a body of one hundred
_Equites_ or Knights, called a _century_, which shows that these
divisions, being unnecessary in a town, were at first merely military.
But an instinct for greatness seems to have led the little township of
Rome to provide itself in advance with a political system suitable for
the capital of the world.

Out of this original division an awkward situation soon arose. The
tribes of the Albans (Ramnenses) and the Sabines (Tatienses) remained
always in the same condition, while that of the foreigners (Luceres)
continually grew as more and more foreigners came to live at Rome,
so that it soon surpassed the others in strength. Servius remedied
this dangerous fault by changing the principle of cleavage, and
substituting for the racial division, which he abolished, a new one
based on the quarter of the town inhabited by each tribe. Instead of
three tribes he created four, each occupying and named after one of the
hills of Rome. Thus, while redressing the inequality of the moment, he
also provided for the future; and in order that the division might be
one of persons as well as localities, he forbade the inhabitants of one
quarter to migrate to another, and so prevented the mingling of the
races.

He also doubled the three old centuries of Knights and added twelve
more, still keeping the old names, and by this simple and prudent
method, succeeded in making a distinction between the body of Knights
and the people, without a murmur from the latter.

To the four urban tribes Servius added fifteen others called rural
tribes, because they consisted of those who lived in the country,
divided into fifteen cantons. Subsequently, fifteen more were created,
and the Roman people finally found itself divided into thirty-five
tribes, as it remained down to the end of the Republic.

The distinction between urban and rural tribes had one effect which
is worth mention, both because it is without parallel elsewhere, and
because to it Rome owed the preservation of her morality and the
enlargement of her empire. We should have expected that the urban
tribes would soon monopolise power and honours, and lose no time in
bringing the rural tribes into disrepute; but what happened was exactly
the reverse. The taste of the early Romans for country life is well
known. This taste they owed to their wise founder, who made rural and
military labours go along with liberty, and, so to speak, relegated to
the town arts, crafts, intrigue, fortune and slavery.

Since therefore all Rome's most illustrious citizens lived in the
fields and tilled the earth, men grew used to seeking there alone the
mainstays of the republic. This condition, being that of the best
patricians, was honoured by all men; the simple and laborious life
of the villager was preferred to the slothful and idle life of the
_bourgeoisie_ of Rome; and he who, in the town, would have been but a
wretched proletarian, became, as a labourer in the fields, a respected
citizen. Not without reason, says Varro, did our great-souled ancestors
establish in the village the nursery of the sturdy and valiant men
who defended them in time of war and provided for their Sustenance in
time of peace. Pliny states positively that the country tribes were
honoured because of the men of whom they were composed; while cowards
men wished to dishonour were transferred, as a public disgrace, to the
town tribes. The Sabine Appius Claudius, when he had come to settle
in Rome, was loaded with honours and enrolled in a rural tribe, which
subsequently took his family name. Lastly, freedmen always entered the
urban, and never the rural, tribes: nor is there a single example,
throughout the Republic, of a freedman, though he had become a citizen,
reaching any magistracy.

This was an excellent rule; but it was carried so far that in the end
it led to a change and certainly to an abuse in the political system.

First the censors, after having for a long time claimed the right of
transferring citizens arbitrarily from one tribe to another, allowed
most persons to enrol themselves in whatever tribe they pleased. This
permission certainly did no good, and further robbed the censorship
of one of its greatest resources. Moreover, as the great and powerful
all got themselves enrolled in the country tribes, while the freedmen
who had become citizens remained with the populace in the town tribes,
both soon ceased to have any local or territorial meaning, and all were
so confused that the members of one could not be told from those of
another except by the registers; so that the idea of the word _tribe_
became personal instead of real, or rather came to be little more than
a chimera.

It happened in addition that the town tribes, being more on the spot,
were often the stronger in the comitia and sold the State to those who
stooped to buy the votes of the rabble composing them.

As the founder had set up ten _curiæ_ in each tribe, the whole Roman
people, which was then contained within the walls, consisted of thirty
_curia_, each with its temples, its gods, its officers, its priests and
its festivals, which were called _compitalia_ and corresponded to the
_paganalia,_ held in later times by the rural tribes.

When Servius made his new division, as the thirty _curiæ_ could not be
shared equally between his four tribes, and as he was unwilling to
interfere with them, they became a further division of the inhabitants
of Rome, quite independent of the tribes: but in the case of the rural
tribes and their members there was no question of _curiæ_ as the
tribes had then become a purely civil institution, and, a new system
of levying troops having been introduced, the military divisions of
Romulus were superfluous. Thus, although every citizen was enrolled in
a tribe, there were very many who were not members of a _curia_.
Servius made yet a third division, quite distinct from the two we have
mentioned, which became, in its effects, the most important of all.
He distributed the whole Roman people into six classes, distinguished
neither by place nor by person, but by wealth; the first classes
included the rich, the last the poor, and those between persons of
moderate means. These six classes were subdivided into one hundred and
ninety-three other bodies, called centuries, which were so divided that
the first class alone comprised more than half of them, while the last
comprised only one. Thus the class that had the smallest number of
members had the largest number of centuries, and the whole of the last
class only counted as a single subdivision, although it alone included
more than half the inhabitants of Rome.

In order that the people might have the less insight into the results
of this arrangement, Servius tried to give it a military tone: in
the second class he inserted two centuries of armourers, and in the
fourth two of makers of instruments of war: in each class, except the
last, he distinguished young and old, that is, those who were under an
obligation to bear arms and those whose age gave them legal exemption.
It was this distinction, rather than that of wealth, which required
frequent repetition of the census or counting. Lastly, he ordered that
the assembly should be held in the Campus Martius, and that all who
were of age to serve should come there armed.

The reason for his not making in the last class also the division of
young and old was that the populace, of whom it was composed, was not
given the right to bear arms for its country: a man had to possess a
hearth to acquire the right to defend it, and of all the troops of
beggars who to-day lend lustre to the armies of kings, there is perhaps
not one who would not have been driven with scorn out of a Roman
cohort, at a time when soldiers were the defenders of liberty.

In this last class, however, _proletarians_ were distinguished from
_capite censi._ The former, not quite reduced to nothing, at least gave
the State citizens, and sometimes, when the need was pressing, even
soldiers. Those who had nothing at all, and could be numbered only by
counting heads, were regarded as of absolutely no account, and Marius
was the first who stooped to enrol them.

Without deciding now whether this third arrangement was good or bad in
itself, I think I may assert that it could have been made practicable
only by the simple morals, the disinterestedness, the liking for
agriculture and the scorn for commerce and for love of gain which
characterised the early Romans. Where is the modern people among whom
consuming greed, unrest, intrigue, continual removals, and perpetual
changes of fortune, could let such a system last for twenty years
without turning the State upside down? We must indeed observe that
morality and the censorship, being stronger than this institution,
corrected its defects at Rome, and that the rich man found himself
degraded to the class of the poor for making too much display of his
riches.

From all this it is easy to understand why only five classes are
almost always mentioned, though there were really six. The sixth, as
it furnished neither soldiers to the army nor votes in the Campus
Martius,[1] and was almost without function in the State, was seldom
regarded as of any account.

These were the various ways in which the Roman people was divided. Let
us now see the effect on the assemblies. When lawfully summoned, these
were called _comitia_: they were usually held in the public square
at Rome or in the Campus Martius, and were distinguished as _Comitia
Curiata, Comitia Centuriata_, and _Comitia Tributa_, according to
the form under which they were convoked. The _Comitia Curiata_ were
founded by Romulus; the _Centuriata_ by Servius; and the _Tributa_
by the tribunes of the people. No law received its sanction and no
magistrate was elected, save in the comitia; and as every citizen
was enrolled in a _curia_, a century, or a tribe, it follows that no
citizen was excluded from the right of voting, and that the Roman
people was truly sovereign both _de jure_ and _de facto_.

For the comitia to be lawfully assembled, and for their acts to have
the force of law, three conditions were necessary. First, the body
or magistrate convoking them had to possess the necessary authority;
secondly, the assembly had to be held on a day allowed by law; and
thirdly, the auguries had to be favourable.

The reason for the first regulation needs no explanation; the second is
a matter of policy. Thus, the comitia might not be held on festivals
or market-days, when the country-folk, coming to Rome on business, had
not time to spend the day in the public square. By means of the third,
the senate held in check the proud and restive people, and meetly
restrained the ardour of seditious tribunes, who, however, found more
than one way of escaping this hindrance.

Laws and the election of rulers were not the only questions submitted
to the judgment of the comitia: as the Roman people had taken on itself
the most important functions of government, it may be said that the lot
of Europe was regulated in its assemblies. The variety of their objects
gave rise to the various forms these took, according to the matters on
which they had to pronounce.

In order to judge of these various forms, it is enough to compare
them. Romulus, when he set up _curiæ_, had in view the checking of
the senate by the people, and of the people by the senate, while
maintaining his ascendancy over both alike. He therefore gave the
people, by means of this assembly, all the authority of numbers to
balance that of power and riches, which he left to the patricians.
But, after the spirit of monarchy, he left all the same a greater
advantage to the patricians in the influence of their clients on the
majority of votes. This excellent institution of patron and client
was a masterpiece of statesmanship and humanity without which the
patriciate, being flagrantly in contradiction to the republican
spirit, could not have survived. Rome alone has the honour of having
given to the world this great example, which never led to any abuse,
and yet has never been followed.

As the assemblies by _curiæ_ persisted under the kings till the time
of Servius, and the reign of the later Tarquin was not regarded as
legitimate, royal laws were called generally _leges curiatæ_.

Under the Republic, the _curiæ_ still confined to the four urban
tribes, and including only the populace of Rome, suited neither the
senate, which led the patricians, nor the tribunes, who, though
plebeians, were at the head of the well-to-do citizens. They therefore
fell into disrepute, and their degradation was such, that thirty
lictors used to assemble and do what the _Comitia Curiata_ should have
done.

The division by centuries was so favourable to the aristocracy that it
is hard to see at first how the senate ever failed to carry the day in
the comitia bearing their name, by which the consuls, the censors and
the other curule magistrates were elected. Indeed, of the hundred and
ninety-three centuries into which the six classes of the whole Roman
people were divided, the first class contained ninety-eight; and, as
voting went solely by centuries, this class alone had a majority over
all the rest. When all these centuries were in agreement, the rest of
the votes were not even taken; the decision of the smallest number
passed for that of the multitude, and it may be said that, in the
_Comitia Centuriata_, decisions were regulated far more by depth of
purses than by the number of votes.

But this extreme authority was modified in two ways. First, the
tribunes as a rule, and always a great number of plebeians, belonged
to the class of the rich, and so counterbalanced the influence of the
patricians in the first class.

The second way was this. Instead of causing the centuries to vote
throughout in order, which would have meant beginning always with the
first, the Romans always chose one by lot which proceeded alone to
the election; after this all the centuries were summoned another day
according to their rank, and the same election was repeated, and as a
rule confirmed. Thus the authority of example was taken away from rank,
and given to the lot on a democratic principle.

From this custom resulted a further advantage. The citizens from the
country had time, between the two elections, to inform themselves of
the merits of the candidate who had been provisionally nominated,
and did not have to vote without knowledge of the case. But, under
the pretext of hastening matters, the abolition of this custom was
achieved, and both elections were held on the same day.

The _Comitia Tributa_ were properly the council of the Roman people.
They were convoked by the tribunes alone; at them the tribunes were
elected and passed their plebiscita. The senate not only had no
standing in them, but even no right to be present; and the senators,
being forced to obey laws on which they could not vote, were in this
respect less free than the meanest citizens. This injustice was
altogether ill-conceived, and was alone enough to invalidate the
decrees of a body to which all its members were not admitted. Had all
the patricians attended the comitia by virtue of the right they had as
citizens, they would not, as mere private individuals, have had any
considerable influence on a vote reckoned by counting heads, where the
meanest proletarian was as good as the _princeps senatus_.

It may be seen, therefore, that besides the order which was achieved
by these various ways of distributing so great a people and taking its
votes, the various methods were not reducible to forms indifferent in
themselves, but the results of each were relative to the objects which
caused it to be preferred.

Without going here into further details, we may gather from what has
been said above that the _Comitia Tributa_ were the most favourable to
popular government, and the _Comitia Centuriata_ to aristocracy. The
_Comitia Curiata,_ in which the populace of Rome formed the majority,
being fitted only to further tyranny and evil designs, naturally fell
into disrepute, and even seditious persons abstained from using a
method which too clearly revealed their projects. It is indisputable
that the whole majesty of the Roman people lay solely in the _Comitia
Centuriata_, which alone included all; for the _Comitia Curiata_
excluded the rural tribes, and the _Comitia Tributa_ the senate and the
patricians.

As for the method of taking the vote, it was among the ancient Romans
as simple as their morals, although not so simple as at Sparta. Each
man declared his vote aloud, and a clerk duly wrote it down; the
majority in each tribe determined the vote of the tribe, the majority
of the tribes that of the people, and so with _curiæ_ and centuries.
This custom was good as long as honesty was triumphant among the
citizens, and each man was ashamed to vote publicly in favour of an
unjust proposal or an unworthy subject; but, when the people grew
corrupt and votes were bought, it was fitting that voting should be
secret in order that purchasers might be restrained by mistrust, and
rogues be given the means of not being traitors.

I know that Cicero attacks this change, and attributes partly to it the
ruin of the Republic. But though I feel the weight Cicero's authority
must carry on such a point, I cannot agree with him; I hold, on the
contrary, that, for want of enough such changes, the destruction of the
State must be hastened. Just as the regimen of health does riot suit
the sick, we should not wish to govern a people that has been corrupted
by the laws that a good people requires. There is no better proof of
this rule than the long life of the Republic of Venice, of which the
shadow still exists, solely because its laws are suitable only for men
who are wicked.

The citizens were provided, therefore, with tablets by means of which
each man could vote without any one knowing how he voted: new methods
were also introduced for collecting the tablets, for counting voices,
for comparing numbers, etc.; but all these precautions did not prevent
the good faith of the officers charged with these functions[2] from
being often suspect. Finally, to prevent intrigues and trafficking in
votes, edicts were issued; but their very number proves how useless
they were.

Towards the close of the Republic, it was often necessary to have
recourse to extraordinary expedients in order to supplement the
inadequacy of the laws. Sometimes miracles were supposed; but this
method, while it might impose on the people, could not impose on those
who governed. Sometimes an assembly was hastily called together,
before the candidates had time to form their factions: sometimes a
whole sitting was occupied with talk, when it was seen that the people
had been won over and was on the point of taking up a wrong position.
But in the end ambition eluded all attempts to check it; and the most
incredible fact of all is that, in the midst of all these abuses,
the vast people, thanks to its ancient regulations, never ceased to
elect magistrates, to pass laws, to judge cases, and to carry through
business both public and private, almost as easily as the senate itself
could have done.


[1] I say "in the Campus Martius" because it was there that the comitia
assembled by centuries; in its two other forms the people assembled
in the _forum_ or elsewhere; and then the _capite censi_ had as much
influence and authority as the foremost citizens.

[2] Custodes, diribitores, rogatores suffragiorum.




CHAPTER V

THE TRIBUNATE


When an exact proportion cannot be established between the constituent
parts of the State, or when causes that cannot be removed continually
alter the relation of one part to another, recourse is had to the
institution of a peculiar magistracy that enters into no corporate
unity with the rest. This restores to each term its right relation to
the others, and provides a link or middle term between either prince
and people, or prince and Sovereign, or, if necessary, both at once.

This body, which I shall call the _tribunate_, is the preserver of the
laws and of the legislative power. It serves sometimes to protect the
Sovereign against the government, as the tribunes of the people did
at Rome; sometimes to uphold the government against the people, as
the Council of Ten now does at Venice; and sometimes to maintain the
balance between the two, as the Ephors did at Sparta.

The tribunate is not a constituent part of the city, and should have
no share in either legislative or executive power; but this very fact
makes its own power the greater: for, while it can do nothing, it can
prevent anything from being done. It is more sacred and more revered,
as the defender of the laws, than the prince who executes them, or than
the Sovereign which ordains them. This was seen very clearly at Rome,
when the proud patricians, for all their scorn of the people, were
forced to bow before one of its officers, who had neither auspices nor
jurisdiction.

The tribunate, wisely tempered, is the strongest support a good
constitution can have; but if its strength is ever so little excessive,
it upsets the whole State. Weakness, on the other hand, is not natural
to it: provided it is something, it is never less than it should be.

It degenerates into tyranny when it usurps the executive power, which
it should confine itself to restraining, and when it tries to dispense
with the laws, which it should confine itself to protecting. The
immense power of the Ephors, harmless as long as Sparta preserved its
morality, hastened corruption when once it had begun. The blood of
Agis, slaughtered by these tyrants, was avenged by his successor; the
crime and the punishment of the Ephors alike hastened the destruction
of the republic, and after Cleomenes Sparta ceased to be of any
account. Rome perished in the same way: the excessive power of the
tribunes, which they had usurped by degrees, finally served, with the
help of laws made to secure liberty, as a safeguard for the emperors
who destroyed it. As for the Venetian Council of Ten, it is a tribunal
of blood, an object of horror to patricians and people alike; and, so
far from giving a lofty protection to the laws, it does nothing, now
they have become degraded, but strike in the darkness blows of which no
one dare take note.

The tribunate, like the government, grows weak as the number of its
members increases. When the tribunes of the Roman people, who first
numbered only two, and then five, wished to double that number, the
senate let them do so, in the confidence that it could use one to check
another, as indeed it afterwards freely did.

The best method of preventing usurpations by so formidable a body,
though no government has yet made use of it, would be not to make it
permanent, but to regulate the periods during which it should remain
in abeyance. These intervals, which should not be long enough to give
abuses time to grow strong, may be so fixed by law that they can easily
be shortened at need by extraordinary commissions.

This method seems to me to have no disadvantages, because, as I have
said, the tribunate, which forms no part of the constitution, can be
removed without the constitution being affected. It seems to be also
efficacious, because a newly restored magistrate starts not with the
power his predecessor exercised, but with that which the law allows him.




CHAPTER VI

THE DICTATORSHIP


The inflexibility of the laws, which prevents them from adapting
themselves to circumstances, may, in certain cases, render them
disastrous, and make them bring about, at a time of crisis, the ruin
of the State. The order and slowness of the forms they enjoin require
a space of time which circumstances sometimes withhold. A thousand
cases against which the legislator has made no provision may present
themselves, and it is a highly necessary part of foresight to be
conscious that everything cannot be foreseen.

It is wrong therefore to wish to make political institutions so strong
as to render it impossible to suspend their operation. Even Sparta
allowed its laws to lapse.

However, none but the greatest dangers can counter-balance that of
changing the public order, and the sacred power of the laws should
never be arrested save when the existence of the country is at stake.
In these rare and obvious cases, provision is made for the public
security by a particular act entrusting it to him who is most worthy.
This commitment may be carried out in either of two ways, according to
the nature of the danger.

If increasing the activity of the government is a sufficient remedy,
power is concentrated in the hands of one or two of its members: in
this case the change is not in the authority of the laws, but only in
the form of administering them. If, on the other hand, the peril is
of such a kind that the paraphernalia of the laws are an obstacle to
their preservation, the method is to nominate a supreme ruler, who
shall silence all the laws and suspend for a moment the sovereign
authority. In such a case, there is no doubt about the general will,
and it is clear that the people's first intention is that the State
shall not perish. Thus the suspension of the legislative authority is
in no sense its abolition; the magistrate who silences it cannot make
it speak; he dominates it, but cannot represent it. He can do anything,
except make laws.

The first method was used by the Roman senate when, in a consecrated
formula, it charged the consuls to provide for the safety of the
Republic. The second was employed when one of the two consuls nominated
a dictator:[1] a custom Rome borrowed from Alba.

During the first period of the Republic, recourse was very often had to
the dictatorship, because the State had not yet a firm enough basis to
be able to maintain itself by the strength of its constitution alone.
As the state of morality then made superfluous many of the precautions
which would have been necessary at other times, there was no fear that
a dictator would abuse his authority, or try to keep it beyond his term
of office. On the contrary, so much power appeared to be burdensome
to him who was clothed with it, and he made all speed to lay it down,
as if taking the place of the laws had been too troublesome and too
perilous a position to retain.

It is therefore the danger not of its abuse, but of its cheapening,
that makes me attack the indiscreet use of this supreme magistracy in
the earliest times. For as long as it was freely employed at elections,
dedications and purely formal functions, there was danger of its
becoming less formidable in time of need, and of men growing accustomed
to regarding as empty a title that was used only on occasions of empty
ceremonial.

Towards the end of the Republic, the Romans, having grown more
circumspect, were as unreasonably sparing in the use of the
dictatorship as they had formerly been lavish. It is easy to see
that their fears were without foundation, that the weakness of the
capital secured it against the magistrates who were in its midst; that
a dictator might, in certain cases, defend the public liberty, but
could never endanger it; and that the chains of Rome would be forged,
not in Rome itself, but in her armies. The weak resistance offered by
Marius to Sulla, and by Pompey to Cæsar, clearly showed what was to be
expected from authority at home against force from abroad.

This misconception led the Romans to make great mistakes; such, for
example, as the failure to nominate a dictator in the Catilinarian
conspiracy. For, as only the city itself, with at most some province
in Italy, was concerned, the unlimited authority the laws gave to the
dictator would have enabled him to make short work of the conspiracy,
which was, in fact, stifled only by a combination of lucky chances
human prudence had no right to expect.

Instead, the senate contented itself with entrusting its whole power
to the consuls, so that Cicero, in order to take effective action, was
compelled on a capital point to exceed his powers; and if, in the first
transports of joy, his conduct was approved, he was justly called,
later on, to account for the blood of citizens spilt in violation of
the laws. Such a reproach could never have been levelled at a dictator.
But the consul's eloquence carried the day; and he himself, Roman
though he was, loved his own glory better than his country, and sought,
not so much the most lawful and secure means of saving the State, as to
get for himself the whole honour of having done so.[2] He was therefore
justly honoured as the liberator of Rome, and also justly punished
as a law-breaker. However brilliant his recall may have been, it was
undoubtedly an act of pardon.

However this important trust be conferred, it is important that its
duration should be fixed at a very brief period, incapable of being
ever prolonged. In the crises which lead to its adoption, the State
is either soon lost, or soon saved; and, the present need passed,
the dictatorship becomes either tyrannical or idle. At Rome, where
dictators held office for six months only, most of them abdicated
before their time was up. If their term had been longer, they might
well have tried to prolong it still further, as the decemvirs did when
chosen for a year. The dictator had only time to provide against the
need that had caused him to be chosen; he had none to think of further
projects.


[1] The nomination was made secretly by night, as if there were
something shameful in setting a man above the laws.

[2] That is what he could not be sure of, if he proposed a dictator;
for he dared not nominate himself, and could not be certain that his
colleague would nominate him.




CHAPTER VII

THE CENSORSHIP


As the law is the declaration of the general will, the censorship is
the declaration of the public judgment: public opinion is the form of
law which the censor administers, and, like the prince, only applies to
particular cases.

The censorial tribunal, so far from being the arbiter of the people's
opinion, only declares it, and, as soon as the two part company, its
decisions are null and void.

It is useless to distinguish the morality of a nation from the objects
of its esteem; both depend on the same principle and are necessarily
indistinguishable. There is no people on earth the choice of whose
pleasures is not decided by opinion rather than nature. Right men's
opinions, and their morality will purge itself. Men always love what is
good or what they find good; it is in judging what is good that they
go wrong. This judgment, therefore, is what must be regulated. He who
judges of morality judges of honour; and he who judges of honour finds
his law in opinion.

The opinions of a people are derived from its constitution; although
the law does not regulate morality, it is legislation that gives it
birth. When legislation grows weak, morality degenerates; but in such
cases the judgment of the censors will not do what the force of the
laws has failed to effect.

From this it follows that the censorship may be useful for the
preservation of morality, but can never be so for its restoration. Set
up censors while the laws are vigorous; as soon as they have lost their
vigour, all hope is gone; no legitimate power can retain force when
the laws have lost it.

The censorship upholds morality by preventing opinion from growing
corrupt, by preserving its rectitude by means of wise applications, and
sometimes even by fixing it when it is still uncertain. The employment
of seconds in duels, which had been carried to wild extremes in the
kingdom of France, was done away with merely by these words in a royal
edict: "As for those who are cowards enough to call upon seconds." This
judgment, in anticipating that of the public, suddenly decided it. But
when edicts from the same source tried to pronounce duelling itself an
act of cowardice, as indeed it is, then, since common opinion does not
regard it as such, the public took no notice of a decision on a point
on which its mind was already made up.

I have stated elsewhere[1] that as public opinion is not subject to
any constraint, there need be no trace of it in the tribunal set up to
represent it. It is impossible to admire too much the art with which
this resource, which we moderns have wholly lost, was employed by the
Romans, and still more by the Lacedæmonians.

A man of bad morals having made a good proposal in the Spartan Council,
the Ephors neglected it, and caused the same proposal to be made by a
virtuous citizen. What an honour for the one, and what a disgrace for
the other, without praise or blame of either! Certain drunkards from
Samos[2] polluted the tribunal of the Ephors: the next day, a public
edict gave Samians permission to be filthy. An actual punishment would
not have been so severe as such an impunity. When Sparta has pronounced
on what is or is not right, Greece makes no appeal from her judgments.


[1] I merely call attention in this chapter to a subject with which I
have dealt at greater length in my _Letter to M. d'Alembert_.

[2] They were from another island, which the delicacy of our language
forbids me to name on this occasion.




CHAPTER VIII

CIVIL RELIGION


At first men had no kings save the gods, and no government save
theocracy. They reasoned like Caligula, and, at that period, reasoned
aright. It takes a long time for feeling so to change that men can make
up their minds to take their equals as masters, in the hope that they
will profit by doing so.

From the mere fact that God was set over every political society, it
followed that there were as many gods as peoples. Two peoples that were
strangers the one to the other, and almost always enemies, could not
long recognise the same master: two armies giving battle could not obey
the same leader. National divisions thus led to polytheism, and this in
turn gave rise to theological and civil intolerance, which, as we shall
see hereafter, are by nature the same.

The fancy the Greeks had for rediscovering their gods among the
barbarians arose from the way they had of regarding themselves as the
natural Sovereigns of such peoples. But there is nothing so absurd
as the erudition which in our days identifies and confuses gods of
different nations. As if Moloch, Saturn and Chronos could be the same
god! As if the Phœnician Baal, the Greek Zeus, and the Latin Jupiter
could be the same! As if there could still be anything common to
imaginary beings with different names!

If it is asked how in pagan times, where each State had its cult
and its gods, there were no wars of religion, I answer that it was
precisely because each State, having its own cult as well as its
own government, made no distinction between its gods and its laws.
Political war was also theological; the provinces of the gods were, so
to speak, fixed by the boundaries of nations. The god of one people had
no right over another. The gods of the pagans were not jealous gods;
they shared among themselves the empire of the world: even Moses and
the Hebrews sometimes lent themselves to this view by speaking of the
God of Israel. It is true, they regarded as powerless the gods of
the Canaanites, a proscribed people condemned to destruction, whose
place they were to take; but remember how they spoke of the divisions
of the neighbouring peoples they were forbidden to attack! "Is not
the possession of what belongs to your god Chamos lawfully your due?"
said Jephthah to the Ammonites. "We have the same title to the lands
our conquering God has made his own."[1] Here, I think, there is a
recognition that the rights of Chamos and those of the God of Israel
are of the same nature.

But when the Jews, being subject to the kings of Babylon, and,
subsequently, to those of Syria, still obstinately refused to recognise
any god save their own, their refusal was regarded as rebellion against
their conqueror, and drew down on them the persecutions we read of
in their history, which are without parallel till the coming of
Christianity.[2]

Every religion, therefore, being attached solely to the laws of the
State which prescribed it, there was no way of converting a people
except by enslaving it, and there could be no missionaries save
conquerors. The obligation to change cults being the law to which the
vanquished yielded, it was necessary to be victorious before suggesting
such a change. So far from men fighting for the gods, the gods, as in
Homer, fought for men; each asked his god for victory, and repayed him
with new altars. The Romans, before taking a city, summoned its gods
to quit it; and, in leaving the Tarentines their outraged gods, they
regarded them as subject to their own and compelled to do them homage.
They left the vanquished their gods as they left them their laws. A
wreath to the Jupiter of the Capitol was often the only tribute they
imposed.

Finally, when, along with their empire, the Romans had spread their
cult and their gods, and had themselves often adopted those of the
vanquished, by granting to both alike the rights of the city, the
peoples of that vast empire insensibly found themselves with multitudes
of gods and cults, everywhere almost the same; and thus paganism
throughout the known world finally came to be one and the same religion.

It was in these circumstances that Jesus came to set up on earth a
spiritual kingdom, which, by separating the theological from the
political system, made the State no longer one, and brought about
the internal divisions which have never ceased to trouble Christian
peoples. As the new idea of a kingdom of the other world could never
have occurred to pagans, they always looked on the Christians as really
rebels, who, while feigning to submit, were only waiting for the chance
to make themselves independent and their masters, and to usurp by guile
the authority they pretended in their weakness to respect. This was the
cause of the persecutions.

What the pagans had feared took place. Then everything changed its
aspect: the humble Christians changed their language, and soon this
so-called kingdom of the other world turned, under a visible leader,
into the most violent of earthly despotisms.

However, as there have always been a prince and civil laws, this double
power and conflict of jurisdiction have made all good polity impossible
in Christian States; and men have never succeeded in finding out
whether they were bound to obey the master or the priest.

Several peoples, however, even in Europe and its neighbourhood, have
desired without success to preserve or restore the old system: but
the spirit of Christianity has everywhere prevailed. The sacred cult
has always remained or again become independent of the Sovereign, and
there has been no necessary link between it and the body of the State.
Mahomet held very sane views, and linked his political system well
together; and, as long as the form of his government continued under
the caliphs who succeeded him, that government was indeed one, and so
far good. But the Arabs, having grown prosperous, lettered, civilised,
slack and cowardly, were conquered by barbarians: the division between
the two powers began again; and, although it is less apparent among
the Mahometans than among the Christians, it none the less exists,
especially in the sect of Ali, and there are States, such as Persia,
where it is continually making itself felt.

Among us, the Kings of England have made themselves heads of the
Church, and the Czars have done the same: but this title has made them
less its masters than its ministers; they have gained not so much the
right to change it, as the power to maintain it: they are not its
legislators, but only its princes. Wherever the clergy is a corporate
body,[3] it is master and legislator in its own country. There are
thus two powers, two Sovereigns, in England and in Russia, as well as
elsewhere.

Of all Christian writers, the philosopher Hobbes alone has seen the
evil and how to remedy it, and has dared to propose the reunion of the
two heads of the eagle, and the restoration throughout of political
unity, without which no State or government will ever be rightly
constituted. But he should have seen that the masterful spirit of
Christianity is incompatible with his system, and that the priestly
interest would always be stronger than that of the State. It is not so
much what is false and terrible in his political theory, as what is
just and true, that has drawn down hatred on it.[4]

I believe that if the study of history were developed from this point
of view, it would be easy to refute the contrary opinions of Bayle and
Warburton, one of whom holds that religion can be of no use to the body
politic, while the other, on the contrary, maintains that Christianity
is its strongest support. We should demonstrate to the former that
no State has ever been founded without a religious basis, and to the
latter, that the law of Christianity at bottom does more harm by
weakening than good by strengthening the constitution of the State. To
make myself understood, I have only to make a little more exact the too
vague ideas of religion as relating to this subject.

Religion, considered in relation to society, which is either general
or particular, may also be divided into two kinds: the religion of
man, and that of the citizen. The first, which has neither temples,
nor altars, nor rites, and is confined to the purely internal cult
of the supreme God and the eternal obligations of morality, is the
religion of the Gospel pure and simple, the true theism, what may be
called natural divine right or law. The other, which is codified in a
single country, gives it its gods, its own tutelary patrons; it has its
dogmas, its rites, and its external cult prescribed by law; outside the
single nation that follows it, all the world is in its sight infidel,
foreign and barbarous; the duties and rights of man extend for it only
as far as its own altars. Of this kind were all the religions of early
peoples, which we may define as civil or positive divine right or law.

There is a third sort of religion of a more singular kind, which gives
men two codes of legislation, two rulers, and two countries, renders
them subject to contradictory duties, and makes it impossible for
them to be faithful both to religion and to citizenship. Such are
the religions of the Lamas and of the Japanese, and such is Roman
Christianity, which may be called the religion of the priest. It leads
to a sort of mixed and anti-social code which has no name.

In their political aspect, all these three kinds of religion have their
defects. The third is so clearly bad, that it is waste of time to stop
to prove it such. All that destroys social unity is worthless; all
institutions that set man in contradiction to himself are worthless.

The second is good in that it unites the divine cult with love of
the laws, and, making country the object of the citizens' adoration,
teaches them that service done to the State is service done to its
tutelary god. It is a form of theocracy, in which there can be no
pontiff save the prince, and no priests save the magistrates. To die
for one's country then becomes martyrdom; violation of its laws,
impiety; and to subject one who is guilty to public execration is to
condemn him to the anger of the gods: _Sacer estod_.

On the other hand, it is bad in that, being founded on lies and error,
it deceives men, makes them credulous and superstitious, and drowns the
true cult of the Divinity in empty ceremonial. It is bad, again, when
it becomes tyrannous and exclusive, and makes a people bloodthirsty and
intolerant, so that it breathes fire and slaughter, and regards as a
sacred act the killing of every one who does not believe in its gods.
The result is to place such a people in a natural state of war with all
others, so that its security is deeply endangered.

There remains therefore the religion of man or Christianity--not the
Christianity of to-day, but that of the Gospel, which is entirely
different. By means of this holy, sublime, and real religion all men,
being children of one God, recognise one another as brothers, and the
society that unites them is not dissolved even at death.

But this religion, having no particular relation to the body politic,
leaves the laws in possession of the force they have in themselves
without making any addition to it; and thus one of the great bonds that
unite society considered in severalty fails to operate. Nay, more, so
far from binding the hearts of the citizens to the State, it has the
effect of taking them away from all earthly things. I know of nothing
more contrary to the social spirit.

We are told that a people of true Christians would form the most
perfect society imaginable. I see in this supposition only one great
difficulty: that a society of true Christians would not be a society of
men.

I say further that such a society, with all its perfection, would be
neither the strongest nor the most lasting: the very fact that it was
perfect would rob it of its bond of union; the flaw that would destroy
it would lie in its very perfection.

Every one would do his duty; the people would be law-abiding, the
rulers just and temperate; the magistrates upright and incorruptible;
the soldiers would scorn death; there would be neither vanity nor
luxury. So far, so good; but let us hear more.

Christianity as a religion is entirely spiritual, occupied solely with
heavenly things; the country of the Christian is not of this world. He
does his duty, indeed, but does it with profound indifference to the
good or ill success of his cares. Provided he has nothing to reproach
himself with, it matters little to him whether things go well or ill
here on earth. If the State is prosperous, he hardly dares to share
in the public happiness, for fear he may grow proud of his country's
glory; if the State is languishing, he blesses the hand of God that is
hard upon His people.

For the State to be peaceable and for harmony to be maintained, all the
citizens without exception would have to be good Christians; if by ill
hap there should be a single self-seeker or hypocrite, a Catiline or a
Cromwell, for instance, he would certainly get the better of his pious
compatriots. Christian charity does not readily allow a man to think
hardly of his neighbours. As soon as, by some trick, he has discovered
the art of imposing on them and getting hold of a share in the public
authority, you have a man established in dignity; it is the will of
God that he be respected: very soon you have a power; it is God's will
that it be obeyed: and if the power is abused by him who wields it,
it is the scourge wherewith God punishes His children. There would be
scruples about driving out the usurper: public tranquillity would have
to be disturbed, violence would have to be employed, and blood spilt;
all this accords ill with Christian meekness; and after all, in this
vale of sorrows, what does it matter whether we are free men or serfs?
The essential thing is to get to heaven, and resignation is only an
additional means of doing so.

If war breaks out with another State, the citizens march readily out
to battle; not one of them thinks of flight; they do their duty, but
they have no passion for victory; they know better how to die than
how to conquer. What does it matter whether they win or lose? Does
not Providence know better than they what is meet for them? Only
think to what account a proud, impetuous and passionate enemy could
turn their stoicism! Set over against them those generous peoples who
were devoured by ardent love of glory and of their country, imagine
your Christian republic face to face with Sparta or Rome: the pious
Christians will be beaten, crushed and destroyed, before they know
where they are, or will owe their safety only to the contempt their
enemy will conceive for them. It was to my mind a fine oath that was
taken by the soldiers of Fabius, who swore, not to conquer or die, but
to come back victorious--and kept their oath. Christians, would never
have taken such an oath; they would have looked on it as tempting God.

But I am mistaken in speaking of a Christian republic; the terms
are mutually exclusive. Christianity preaches only servitude and
dependence. Its spirit is so favourable to tyranny that it always
profits by such a _régime_. True Christians are made to be slaves,
and they know it and do not much mind: this short life counts for too
little in their eyes.

I shall be told that Christian troops are excellent. I deny it. Show
me an instance. For my part, I know of no Christian troops. I shall be
told of the Crusades. Without disputing the valour of the Crusaders,
I answer that, so far from being Christians, they were the priests'
soldiery, citizens of the Church. They fought for their spiritual
country, which the Church had, somehow or other, made temporal. Well
understood, this goes back to paganism: as the Gospel sets up no
national religion, a holy war is impossible among Christians.

Under the pagan emperors, the Christian soldiers were brave; every
Christian writer affirms it, and I believe it: it was a case of
honourable emulation of the pagan troops. As soon as the emperors were
Christian, this emulation no longer existed, and, when the Cross had
driven out the eagle, Roman valour wholly disappeared.

But, setting aside political considerations, let us come back to what
is right, and settle our principles on this important point. The right
which the social compact gives the Sovereign over the subjects does
not, we have seen, exceed the limits of public expediency.[5] The
subjects then owe the Sovereign an account of their opinions only to
such an extent as they matter to the community. Now, it matters very
much to the community that each citizen should have a religion. That
will make him love his duty; but the dogmas of that religion concern
the State and its members only so far as they have reference to
morality and to the duties which he who professes them is bound to do
to others. Each man may have, over and above, what opinions he pleases,
without it being the Sovereign's business to take cognisance of them;
for, as the Sovereign has no authority in the other world, whatever
the lot of its subjects may be in the life to come, that is not its
business, provided they are good citizens in this life.

There is therefore a purely civil profession of faith of which the
Sovereign should fix the articles, not exactly as religious dogmas, but
as social sentiments without which a man cannot be a good citizen or
a faithful subject.[6] While it can compel no one to believe them, it
can banish from the State whoever does not believe them--it can banish
him, not for impiety, but as an anti-social being, incapable of truly
loving the laws and justice, and of sacrificing, at need, his life to
his duty. If any one, after publicly recognising these dogmas, behaves
as if he does not believe them, let him be punished by death: he has
committed the worst of all crimes, that of lying before the law.

The dogmas of civil religion ought to be few, simple, and exactly
worded, without explanation or commentary. The existence of a mighty,
intelligent and beneficent Divinity, possessed of foresight and
providence, the life to come, the happiness of the just, the punishment
of the wicked, the sanctity of the social contract and the laws:
these are its positive dogmas. Its negative dogmas I confine to one,
intolerance, which is a part of the cults we have rejected.

Those who distinguish civil from theological intolerance are, to my
mind, mistaken. The two forms are inseparable. It is impossible to
live at peace with those we regard as damned; to love them would be
to hate God who punishes them: we positively must either reclaim or
torment them. Wherever theological intolerance is admitted, it must
inevitably have some civil effect;[7] and as soon as it has such an
effect, the Sovereign is no longer Sovereign even in the temporal
sphere: thenceforth priests are the real masters, and kings only their
ministers.

Now that there is and can be no longer an exclusive national religion,
tolerance should be given to all religions that tolerate others,
so long as their dogmas contain nothing contrary to the duties of
citizenship. But whoever dares to say: _Outside the Church is no
salvation,_ ought to be driven from the State, unless the State is the
Church, and the prince the pontiff. Such a dogma is good only in a
theocratic government; in any other, it is fatal. The reason for which
Henry IV is said to have embraced the Roman religion ought to make
every honest man leave it, and still more any prince who knows how to
reason.


[1] Nonne ea quæ possidet Chamos deus tuus, tibi jure debentur?
(Judges xi. 24). Such is the text in the Vulgate. Father de Carrières
translates: "Do you not regard yourselves as having a right to what
your god possesses?" I do not know the force of the Hebrew text: but
I perceive that, in the Vulgate, Jephthah positively recognises the
right of the god Chamos, and that the French translator weakened this
admission by inserting an "according to you," which is not in the Latin.

[2] It is quite clear that the Phocian war, which was called "the
Sacred War," was not a war of religion. Its object was the punishment
of acts of sacrilege, and not the conquest of unbelievers.

[3] It should be noted that the clergy find their bond of union not so
much in formal assemblies, as in the communion of Churches. Communion
and ex-communication are the social compact of the clergy, a compact
which will always make them masters of peoples and kings. All priests
who communicate together are fellow-citizens, even if they come
from opposite ends of the earth. This invention is a masterpiece of
statesmanship: there is nothing like it among pagan priests; who have
therefore never formed a clerical corporate body.

[4] See, for instance, in a letter from Grotius to his brother (April
11, 1643), what that learned man found to praise and to blame in the
_De Cive._ It is true that, with a bent for indulgence, he seems to
pardon the writer the good for the sake of the bad; but all men are not
so forgiving.

[5] "In the republic," says the Marquis d'Argenson, "each man is
perfectly free in what does not harm others." This is the invariable
limitation, which it is impossible to define more exactly. I have not
been able to deny myself the pleasure of occasionally quoting from this
manuscript, though it is unknown to the public, in order to do honour
to the memory of a good and illustrious man, who had kept even in the
Ministry the heart of a good citizen, and views on the government of
his country that were sane and right.

[6] Cæsar, pleading for Catiline, tried to establish the dogma that the
soul is mortal: Cato and Cicero, in refutation, did not waste time in
philosophising. They were content to show that Cæsar spoke like a bad
citizen, and brought forward a doctrine that would have a bad effect on
the State. This, in fact, and not a problem of theology, was what the
Roman senate had to judge.

[7] Marriage, for instance, being a civil contract, has civil effects
without which society cannot even subsist Suppose a body of clergy
should claim the sole right of permitting this act, a right which every
intolerant religion must of necessity claim, is it not clear that in
establishing the authority of the Church in this respect, it will be
destroying that of the prince, who will have thenceforth only as many
subjects as the clergy choose to allow him? Being in a position to
marry or not to marry people, according to their acceptance of such
and such a doctrine, their admission or rejection of such and such a
formula, their greater or less piety, the Church alone, by the exercise
of prudence and firmness, will dispose of all inheritances, offices
and citizens, and even of the State itself, which could not subsist
if it were composed entirely of bastards? But, I shall be told, there
will be appeals on the ground of abuse, summonses and decrees; the
temporalities will be seized. How sad! The clergy, however little, I
will not say courage, but sense it has, will take no notice and go its
way: it will quietly allow appeals, summonses, decrees and seizures,
and, in the end, will remain the master. It is not, I think, a great
sacrifice to give up a part, when one is sure of securing all.




CHAPTER IX

CONCLUSION

Now that I have laid down the true principles of political right, and
tried to give the State a basis of its own to rest on, I ought next
to strengthen it by its external relations, which would include the
law of nations, commerce, the right of war and conquest, public right,
leagues, negotiations, treaties, etc. But all this forms a new subject
that is far too vast for my narrow scope. I ought throughout to have
kept to a more limited sphere.




A DISCOURSE

WHICH WON THE PRIZE AT THE ACADEMY OF DIJON IN 1750, ON THIS QUESTION
PROPOSED BY THE ACADEMY:

HAS THE RESTORATION OF THE ARTS AND SCIENCES HAD A PURIFYING EFFECT
UPON MORALS?

Barbaras his ego sum, qui non intelligor illis.--OVID.[1]

[1] Here I am, a barbarian, because men understand me not.




PREFACE


The following pages contain a discussion of one of the most sublime
and interesting of all moral questions. It is not concerned, however,
with those metaphysical subtleties, which of late have found their way
into every department of literature, and from which even our academic
curricula are not always free. We have now to do with one of those
truths on which the happiness of mankind depends.

I foresee that I shall not readily be forgiven for having taken up the
position I have adopted. Setting myself up against all that is nowadays
most admired, I can expect no less than a universal outcry against me:
nor is the approbation of a few sensible men enough to make me count
on that of the public. But I have taken my stand, and I shall be at no
pains to please either intellectuals or men of the world. There are in
all ages men born to be in bondage to the opinions of the society in
which they live. There are not a few, who to-day play the free-thinker
and the philosopher, who would, if they had lived in the time of the
League, have been no more than fanatics. No author, who has a mind to
outlive his own age, should write for such readers.

A word more and I have done. As I did not expect the honour conferred
on me, I had, since sending in my Discourse, so altered and enlarged
it as almost to make it a new work; but in the circumstances I have
felt bound to publish it just as it was when it received the prize. I
have only added a few notes, and left two alterations which are easily
recognisable, of which the Academy possibly might not have approved.
The respect, gratitude and even justice I owe to that body seemed to me
to demand this acknowledgment.




MORAL EFFECTS

OF THE ARTS AND SCIENCES

_Decipimur specie recti_.--HORACE.


The question before me is, "Whether the Restoration of the arts and
sciences has had the effect of purifying or corrupting morals." Which
side am I to take? That, gentlemen, which becomes an honest man, who is
sensible of his own ignorance, and thinks himself none the worse for it.

I feel the difficulty of treating this subject fittingly, before the
tribunal which is to judge of what I advance. How can I presume to
belittle the sciences before one of the most learned assemblies in
Europe, to commend ignorance in a famous Academy, and reconcile my
contempt for study with the respect due to the truly learned?

I was aware of these inconsistencies, but not discouraged by them. It
is not science, I said to myself, that I am attacking; it is virtue
that I am defending, and that before virtuous men--and goodness is even
dearer to the good than learning to the learned.

What then have I to fear? The sagacity of the assembly before which
I am pleading? That, I acknowledge, is to be feared; but rather on
account of faults of construction than of the views I hold. Just
sovereigns have never hesitated to decide against themselves in
doubtful cases; and indeed the most advantageous situation in which a
just claim can be, is that of being laid before a just and enlightened
arbitrator, who is judge in his own case.

To this motive, which encouraged me, I may add another which finally
decided me. And this is, that as I have upheld the cause of truth to
the best of my natural abilities, whatever my apparent success, there
is one reward which cannot fail me. That reward I shall find in the
bottom of my heart.




THE FIRST PART


It is a noble and beautiful spectacle to see man raising himself, so
to speak, from nothing by his own exertions; dissipating, by the light
of reason, all the thick clouds in which he was by nature enveloped;
mounting above himself; soaring in thought even to the celestial
regions; like the sun, encompassing with giant strides the vast extent
of the universe; and, what is still grander and more wonderful, going
back into himself, there to study man and get to know his own nature,
his duties and his end. All these miracles we have seen renewed within
the last few generations.

Europe had relapsed into the barbarism of the earliest ages; the
inhabitants of this part of the world, which is at present so highly
enlightened, were plunged, some centuries ago, in a state still-worse
than ignorance. A scientific jargon, more despicable than mere
ignorance, had usurped the name of knowledge, and opposed an almost
invincible obstacle to its restoration.

Things had come to such a pass, that it required a complete revolution
to bring men back to common sense. This came at last from the quarter
from which it was least to be expected. It was the stupid Mussulman,
the eternal scourge of letters, who was the immediate cause of their
revival among us. The fall of the throne of Constantine brought to
Italy the relics of ancient Greece; and with these precious spoils
France in turn was enriched. The sciences soon followed literature,
and the art of thinking joined that of writing: an order which may
seem strange, but is perhaps only too natural. The world now began to
perceive the principal advantage of an intercourse with the Muses, that
of rendering mankind more sociable by inspiring them with the desire to
please one another with performances worthy of their mutual approbation.

The mind, as well as the body, has its needs: those of the body are the
basis of society, those of the mind its ornaments.

So long as government and law provide for the security and well-being
of men in their common life, the arts, literature and the sciences,
less despotic though perhaps more powerful, fling garlands of flowers
over the chains which weigh them down. They stifle in men's breasts
that sense of original liberty, for which they seem to have been born;
cause them to love their own slavery, and so make of them what is
called a civilised people.

Necessity raised up thrones; the arts and sciences have made them
strong. Powers of the earth, cherish all talents and protect those who
cultivate them.[1] Civilised peoples, cultivate such pursuits: to them,
happy slaves, you owe that delicacy and exquisiteness of taste, which
is so much your boast, that sweetness of disposition and urbanity of
manners which make intercourse so easy and agreeable among you--in a
word, the appearance of all the virtues, without being in possession of
one of them.

It was for this sort of accomplishment, which is by so much the more
captivating as it seems less affected, that Athens and Rome were
so much distinguished in the boasted times of their splendour and
magnificence: and it is doubtless in the same respect that our own age
and nation will excel all periods and peoples. An air of philosophy
without pedantry; an address at once natural and engaging, distant
equally from Teutonic clumsiness and Italian pantomime; these are
the effects of a taste acquired by liberal studies and improved by
conversation with the world. What happiness would it be for those who
live among us, if our external appearance were always a true mirror of
our hearts; if decorum were but virtue; if the maxims we professed were
the rules of our conduct; and if real philosophy were inseparable from
the title of a philosopher! But so many good qualities too seldom go
together; virtue rarely appears in so much pomp and state.

Richness of apparel may proclaim the man of fortune, and elegance the
man of taste; but true health and manliness are known by different
signs. It is under the home-spun of the labourer, and not beneath the
gilt and tinsel of the courtier, that we should look for strength and
vigour of body.

External ornaments are no less foreign to virtue, which is the strength
and activity of the mind. The honest man is an athlete, who loves to
wrestle stark naked; he scorns all those vile trappings, which prevent
the exertion of his strength, and were, for the most part, invented
only to conceal some deformity.

Before art had moulded our behaviour, and taught our passions to speak
an artificial language, our morals were rude but natural; and the
different ways in which we behaved proclaimed at the first glance the
difference of our dispositions. Human nature was not at bottom better
then than now; but men found their security in the ease with which
they could see through one another, and this advantage, of which we no
longer feel the value, prevented their having many vices.

In our day, now that more subtle study and a more refined taste have
reduced the art of pleasing to a system, there prevails in modern
manners a servile and deceptive conformity; so that one would think
every mind had been cast in the same mould. Politeness requires this
thing; decorum that; ceremony has its forms, and fashion its laws, and
these we must always follow, never the promptings of our own nature.

We no longer dare seem what we really are, but lie under a perpetual
restraint; in the meantime the herd of men, which we call society, all
act under the same circumstances exactly alike, unless very particular
and powerful motives prevent them. Thus we never know with whom we have
to deal; and even to know our friends we must wait for some critical
and pressing occasion; that is, till it is too late; for it is on those
very occasions that such knowledge is of use to us.

What a train of vices must attend this uncertainty! Sincere
friendship, real esteem, and perfect confidence are banished from
among men. Jealousy, suspicion, fear, coldness, reserve, hate and
fraud lie constantly concealed under that uniform and deceitful veil
of politeness; that boasted candour and urbanity, for which we are
indebted to the light and leading of this age. We shall no longer take
in vain by our oaths the name of our Creator; but we shall insult Him
with our blasphemies, and our scrupulous ears will take no offence.
We have grown too modest to brag of our own deserts; but we do not
scruple to decry those of others. We do not grossly outrage even our
enemies, but artfully calumniate them. Our hatred of other nations
diminishes, but patriotism dies with it. Ignorance is held in contempt;
but a dangerous scepticism has succeeded it. Some vices indeed are
condemned and others grown dishonourable; but we have still many that
are honoured with the names of virtues, and it is become necessary
that we should either have, or at least pretend to have them. Let who
will extol the moderation of our modern sages, I see nothing in it but
a refinement of intemperance as unworthy of my commendation as their
artificial simplicity.[2]

Such is the purity to which our morals have attained; this is the
virtue we have made our own. Let the arts and sciences claim the share
they have had in this salutary work. I shall add but one reflection
more; suppose an inhabitant of some distant country should endeavour
to form an idea of European morals from the state of the sciences, the
perfection of the arts, the propriety of our public entertainments,
the politeness of our behaviour, the affability of our conversation,
our constant professions of benevolence, and from those tumultuous
assemblies of people of all ranks, who seem, from morning till night,
to have no other care than to oblige one another. Such a stranger, I
maintain, would arrive at a totally false view of our morality.

Where there is no effect, it is idle to look for a cause: but here
the effect is certain and the depravity actual; our minds have been
corrupted in proportion as the arts and sciences have improved. Will
it be said, that this is a misfortune peculiar to the present age? No,
gentlemen, the evils resulting from our vain curiosity are as old as
the world. The daily ebb and flow of the tides are not more regularly
influenced by the moon, than the morals of a people by the progress
of the arts and sciences. As their light has risen above our horizon,
virtue has taken flight, and the same phenomenon has been constantly
observed in all times and places.Take Egypt, the first school of mankind, that ancient country, famous
for its fertility under a brazen sky; the spot from which Sesostris
once set out to conquer the world. Egypt became the mother of
philosophy and the fine arts; soon she was conquered by Cambyses, and
then successively by the Greeks, the Romans, the Arabs, and finally the
Turks.

Take Greece, once peopled by heroes, who twice vanquished Asia.
Letters, as yet in their infancy, had not corrupted the disposition
of its inhabitants; but the progress of the sciences soon produced a
dissoluteness of manners, and the imposition of the Macedonian yoke:
from which time Greece, always learned, always voluptuous and always a
slave, has experienced amid all its revolutions no more than a change
of masters. Not all the eloquence of Demosthenes could breathe life
into a body which luxury and the arts had once enervated.

It was not till the days of Ennius and Terence that Rome, founded by
a shepherd, and made illustrious by I peasants, began to degenerate.
But after the appearance of an Ovid, a Catullus, a Martial, and the
rest of those numerous obscene authors, whose very names are enough to
put modesty to the blush, Rome, once the shrine of virtue, became the
theatre of vice, a scorn among the nations, and an object of derision
even to barbarians. Thus the capital of the world at length submitted
to the yoke of slavery it had imposed on others, and the very day
of its fall was the eve of that on which it conferred on one of its
citizens the title of Arbiter of Good Taste.

What shall I say of that metropolis of the Eastern Empire, which, by
its situation, seemed destined to be the capital of the world; that
refuge of the arts and sciences, when they were banished from the rest
of Europe, more perhaps by wisdom than barbarism? The most profligate
debaucheries, the most abandoned villainies, the most atrocious crimes,
plots, murders and assassinations form the warp and woof of the
history of Constantinople. Such is the pure source from which have
flowed to us the floods of knowledge on which the present age so prides
itself.

But wherefore should we seek, in past ages, for proofs of a truth, of
which the present affords us ample evidence? There is in Asia a vast
empire, where learning is held in honour, and leads to the highest
dignities in the state. If the sciences improved our morals, if they
inspired us with courage and taught us to lay down our lives for the
good of our country, the Chinese should be wise, free and invincible.
But, if there be no vice they do not practise, no crime with which they
are not familiar; if the sagacity of their ministers, the supposed
wisdom of their laws, and the multitude of inhabitants who people that
vast empire, have alike failed to preserve them from the yoke of the
rude and ignorant Tartars, of what use were their men of science and
literature? What advantage has that country reaped from the honours
bestowed on its learned men? Can it be that of being peopled by a race
of scoundrels and slaves?

Contrast with these instances the morals of those few nations which,
being preserved from the contagion of useless knowledge, have by
their virtues become happy in themselves and afforded an example to
the rest of the world. Such were the first inhabitants of Persia,
a nation so singular that virtue was taught among them in the same
manner as the sciences are with us. They very easily subdued Asia,
and possess the exclusive glory of having had the history of their
political institutions regarded as a philosophical romance. Such were
the Scythians, of whom such wonderful eulogies have come down to us.
Such were the Germans, whose simplicity, innocence and virtue, afforded
a most delightful contrast to the pen of an historian, weary of
describing the baseness and villainies of an enlightened, opulent and
voluptuous nation. Such had been even Rome in the days of its poverty
and ignorance. And such has shown itself to be, even in our own times,
that rustic nation, whose justly renowned courage not even adversity
could conquer, and whose fidelity no example could corrupt.[3]

It is not through stupidity that the people have preferred other
activities to those of the mind. They were not ignorant that in other
countries there were men who spent their time in disputing idly about
the sovereign good, and about vice and virtue. They knew that these
useless thinkers were lavish in their own praises, and stigmatised
other nations contemptuously as barbarians. But they noted the morals
of these people, and so learnt what to think of their learning.[4]

Can it be forgotten that, in the very heart of Greece, there arose
a city as famous for the happy ignorance of its inhabitants, as for
the wisdom of its laws; a republic of demi-gods rather than of men,
so greatly superior their virtues seemed to those of mere humanity?
Sparta, eternal proof of the vanity of science, while the vices, under
the conduct of the fine arts, were being introduced into Athens, even
while its tyrant was carefully collecting together the works of the
prince of poets, was driving from her walls artists and the arts, the
learned and their learning!

The difference was seen in the outcome. Athens became the seat of
politeness and taste, the country of orators and philosophers. The
elegance of its buildings equalled that of its language; on every side
might be seen marble and canvas, animated by the hands of the most
skilful artists. From Athens we derive those astonishing performances,
which will serve as models to every corrupt age. The picture of
Lacedæmon is not so highly coloured. There, the neighbouring nations
used to say, "men were born virtuous, their native air seeming to
inspire them with virtue." But its inhabitants have left us nothing but
the memory of their heroic actions: monuments that should not count for
less in our eyes than the most curious relics of Athenian marble.

It is true that, among the Athenians, there were some few wise men who
withstood the general torrent, and preserved their integrity even in
the company of the muses. But hear the judgment which the principal,
and most unhappy of them, passed on the artists and learned men of his
day.

"I have considered the poets," says he, "and I look upon them as people
whose talents impose both on themselves and on others; they give
themselves out for wise men, and are taken for such; but in reality
they are anything sooner than that."

"From the poets," continues Socrates, "I turned to the artists. Nobody
was more ignorant of the arts than myself; nobody was more fully
persuaded that the artists were possessed of amazing knowledge. I soon
discovered, however, that they were in as bad a way as the poets, and
that both had fallen into the same misconception. Because the most
skilful of them excel others in their particular jobs, they think
themselves wiser than all the rest of mankind. This arrogance spoilt
all their skill in my eyes, so that, putting myself in the place of
the oracle, and asking myself whether I would rather be what I am or
what they are, know what they know, or know that I know nothing, I very
readily answered, for myself and the god, that I had rather remain as I
am.

"None of us, neither the sophists, nor the poets, nor the orators, nor
the artists, nor I, know what is the nature of the _true_, the _good_,
or the _beautiful_. But there is this difference between us; that,
though none of these people know anything, they all think they know
something; whereas for my part, if I know nothing, I am at least in no
doubt of my ignorance. So the superiority of wisdom, imputed to me by
the oracle, is reduced merely to my being fully convinced that I am
ignorant of what I do not know."

Thus we find Socrates, the wisest of men in the judgment of the god,
and the most learned of all the Athenians in the opinion of all Greece,
speaking in praise of ignorance. Were he alive now, there is little
reason to think that our modern scholars and artists would induce him
to change his mind. No, gentlemen, that honest man would still persist
in despising our vain sciences. He would lend no aid to swell the flood
of books that flows from every quarter: he would leave to us, as he did
to his disciples, only the example and memory of his virtues; that is
the noblest method of instructing mankind.

Socrates had begun at Athens, and the elder Cato proceeded at Rome, to
inveigh against those seductive and subtle Greeks, who corrupted the
virtue and destroyed the courage of their fellow-citizens: culture,
however, prevailed. Rome was filled with philosophers and orators,
military discipline was neglected, agriculture was held in contempt,
men formed sects, and forgot their country. To the sacred names of
liberty, disinterestedness and obedience to law, succeeded those of
Epicurus, Zeno and Arcesilaus. It was even a saying among their own
philosophers that since learned men appeared among them, honest men had
been in eclipse. Before that time the Romans were satisfied with the
practice of virtue; they were undone when they began to study it.

What would the great soul of Fabricius have felt, if it had been
his misfortune to be called back to life, when he saw the pomp and
magnificence of that Rome, which his arm had saved from ruin, and
his honourable name made more illustrious than all its conquests.
"Ye gods!" he would have said, "what has become of those thatched
roofs and rustic hearths, which were formerly the habitations of
temperance and virtue? What fatal splendour has succeeded the ancient
Roman simplicity? What is this foreign language, this effeminacy of
manners? What is the meaning of these statues, paintings and buildings?
Fools, what have you done? You, the lords of the earth, have made
yourselves the slaves of the frivolous nations you have subdued.
You are governed by rhetoricians, and it has been only to enrich
architects, painters, sculptors and stage-players that you have watered
Greece and Asia with your blood. Even the spoils of Carthage are the
prize of a flute-player. Romans! Romans! make haste to demolish those
amphitheatres, break to pieces those statues, burn those paintings;
drive from among you those slaves who keep you in subjection, and whose
fatal arts are corrupting your morals. Let other hands make themselves
illustrious by such vain talents; the only talent worthy of Rome is
that of conquering the world and making virtue its ruler. When Cyneas
took the Roman senate for an assembly of kings, he was not struck by
either useless pomp or studied elegance. He heard there none of that
futile eloquence, which is now the study and the charm of frivolous
orators. What then was the majesty that Cyneas beheld? Fellow citizens,
he saw the noblest sight that ever existed under heaven, a sight which
not all your riches or your arts can show; an assembly of two hundred
virtuous men, worthy to command in Rome, and to govern the world."

But let pass the distance of time and place, and let us see what has
happened in our own time and country; or rather let us banish odious
descriptions that might offend our delicacy, and spare ourselves the
pains of repeating the same tilings under different names. It was not
for nothing that I invoked the Manes of Fabricius; for what have I
put into his mouth, that might not have come with as much propriety
from Louis the Twelfth or Henry the Fourth? It is true that in France
Socrates would not have drunk the hemlock, but he would have drunk of
a potion infinitely more bitter, of insult, mockery and contempt a
hundred times worse than death.

Thus it is that luxury, profligacy and slavery, have been, in all ages,
the scourge of the efforts of our pride to emerge from that happy
state of ignorance, in which the wisdom of providence had placed us.
That thick veil with which it has covered all its operations seems to
be a sufficient proof that it never designed us for such fruitless
researches. But is there, indeed, one lesson it has taught us, by which
we have rightly profited, or which we have neglected with impunity? Let
men learn for once that nature would have preserved them from science,
as a mother snatches a dangerous weapon from the hands of her child.
Let them know that all the secrets she hides are so many evils from
which she protects them, and that the very difficulty they find in
acquiring knowledge is not the least of her bounty towards them. Men
are perverse; but they would have been far worse, if they had had the
misfortune to be born learned.

How humiliating are these reflections to humanity, and how mortified
by them our pride should be! What! it will be asked, is uprightness
the child of ignorance? Is virtue inconsistent with learning? What
consequences might not be drawn from such suppositions? But to
reconcile these apparent contradictions, we need only examine closely
the emptiness and vanity of those pompous titles, which are so
liberally bestowed on human knowledge, and which so blind our judgment.
Let us consider, therefore, the arts and sciences in themselves. Let us
see what must result from their advancement, and let us not hesitate
to admit the truth of all those points on which our arguments coincide
with the inductions we can make from history.


[1] Sovereigns always see with, pleasure a taste for the arts of
amusement and superfluity, which do not result in the exportation of
bullion, increase among their subjects. They very well know that,
besides nourishing that littleness of mind which is proper to slavery,
the increase of artificial wants only binds so many more chains upon
the people. Alexander, wishing to keep the Ichthyophages in a state
of dependence, compelled them to give up fishing, and subsist on the
customary food of civilised nations. The American savages, who go
naked, and live entirely on the products of the chase, have been always
impossible to subdue. What yoke, indeed, can be imposed on men who
stand in need of nothing?

[2] "I love," said Montaigne, "to converse and hold an argument; but
only with very few people, and that for my own gratification. For to do
so, by way of affording amusement for the great, or of making a parade
of one's talents, is, in my opinion, a trade very ill-becoming a man of
honour." It is the trade of all our intellectuals, save one.

[3] I dare not speak of those happy nations, who did not even know the
name of many vices, which we find it difficult to suppress; the savages
of America, whose simple and natural mode of government Montaigne
preferred, without hesitation, not only to the laws of Plato, but to
the most perfect visions of government philosophy can ever suggest He
cites many examples, striking for those who are capable of appreciating
them. But, what of all that, says he, they can't run to a pair of
breeches!

[4] What are we to think was the real opinion of the Athenians
themselves about eloquence, when they were so very careful to banish
declamation from that upright tribunal, against whose decision even
their gods made no appeal? What did the Romans think of physicians,
when they expelled medicine from the republic? And when the relics of
humanity left among the Spaniards induced them to forbid their lawyers
to set foot in America, what must they have thought of jurisprudence?
May it not be said that they thought, by this single expedient, to make
reparation for all the outrages they had committed against the unhappy
Indians?




THE SECOND PART


An ancient tradition passed out of Egypt into Greece, that some god,
who was an enemy to the repose of mankind, was the inventor of the
sciences.[1] What must the Egyptians, among whom the sciences first
arose, have thought of them? And they beheld, near at hand, the sources
from which they sprang. In fact, whether we turn to the annals of the
world, or eke out with philosophical investigations the uncertain
chronicles of history, we shall not find for human knowledge an origin
answering to the idea we are pleased to entertain of it at present.
Astronomy was born of superstition, eloquence of ambition, hatred,
falsehood and flattery; geometry of avarice; physics of an idle
curiosity; and even moral philosophy of human pride. Thus the arts and
sciences owe their birth to our vices; we should be less doubtful of
their advantages, if they had sprung from our virtues.

Their evil origin is, indeed, but too plainly reproduced in their
objects. What would become of the arts, were they not cherished by
luxury? If men were not unjust, of what use were jurisprudence?
What would become of history, if there were no tyrants, wars,
or conspiracies? In a word, who would pass his life in barren
speculations, if everybody, attentive only to the obligations of
humanity and the necessities of nature, spent his whole life in serving
his country, obliging his friends, and relieving the unhappy? Are we
then made to live and die on the brink of that well at the bottom of
which Truth lies hid? This reflection alone is, in my opinion, enough
to discourage at first setting out every man who seriously endeavours
to instruct himself by the study of philosophy.

What a variety of dangers surrounds us! What a number of wrong paths
present themselves in the investigation of the sciences! Through how
many errors, more perilous than truth itself is useful, must we not
pass to arrive at it? The disadvantages we lie under are evident; for
falsehood is capable of an infinite variety of combinations; but the
truth has only one manner of being. Besides, where is the man who
sincerely desires to find it? Or even admitting his good will, by
what characteristic marks is he sure of knowing it? Amid the infinite
diversity of opinions where is the criterion[2] by which we may
certainly judge of it? Again, what is still more difficult, should we
even be fortunate enough to discover it, who among us will know how to
make right use of it?

If our sciences are futile in the objects they propose, they are
no less dangerous in the effects they produce. Being the effect of
idleness, they generate idleness in their turn; and an irreparable
loss of time is the first prejudice which they must necessarily cause
to society. To live without doing some good is a great evil as well in
the political as in the moral world; and hence every useless citizen
should be regarded as a pernicious person. Tell me then, illustrious
philosophers, of whom we learn the ratios in which attraction acts in
vacuo; and in the revolution of the planets, the relations of spaces
traversed in equal times; by whom we are taught what curves have
conjugate points, points of inflexion, and cusps; how the soul and body
correspond, like two clocks, without actual communication; what planets
may be inhabited; and what insects reproduce in an extraordinary
manner. Answer me, I say, you from whom we receive all this sublime
information, whether we should have been less numerous, worse governed,
less formidable, less flourishing, or more perverse, supposing you had
taught us none of all these fine things.

Reconsider therefore the importance of your productions; and, since
the labours of the most enlightened of our learned men and the best of
our citizens are of so little utility, tell us what we ought to think
of that numerous herd of obscure writers and useless litterateurs, who
devour without any return the substance of the State.

Useless, do I say? Would God they were! Society would be more peaceful,
and morals less corrupt. But these vain and futile declaimers go forth
on all sides, armed with their fatal paradoxes, to sap the foundations
of our faith, and nullify virtue. They smile contemptuously at such
old names as patriotism and religion, and consecrate their talents and
philosophy to the destruction; and defamation of all that men hold
sacred. Not that they bear any real hatred to virtue or dogma; they are
the enemies of public opinion alone; to bring them to the foot of the
altar, it would be enough to banish them to a land of atheists. What
extravagancies will not the rage of singularity induce men to commit!

The waste of time is certainly a great evil; but still greater evils
attend upon literature and the arts. One is luxury, produced like
them by indolence and vanity. Luxury is seldom unattended by the arts
and sciences; and they are always attended by luxury. I know that our
philosophy, fertile in paradoxes, pretends, in contradiction to the
experience of all ages, that luxury contributes to the splendour of
States. But, without insisting on the necessity of sumptuary laws, can
it be denied that rectitude of morals is essential to the duration of
empires, and that luxury is diametrically opposed to such rectitude?
Let it be admitted that luxury is a certain indication of wealth; that
it even serves, if you will, to increase such wealth: what conclusion
is to be drawn from this paradox, so worthy of the times? And what
will become of virtue if riches are to be acquired at any cost? The
politicians of the ancient world were always talking of morals and
virtue; ours speak of nothing but commerce and money. One of them will
tell you that in such a country a man is worth just as much as he will
sell for at Algiers: another, pursuing the same mode of calculation,
finds that in some countries a man is worth nothing, and in others
still less than nothing; they value men as they do droves of oxen.
According to them, a man is worth no more to the State, than the
amount he consumes; and thus a Sybarite would be worth at least thirty
Lacedæmonians. Let these writers tell me, however, which of the two
republics, Sybaris or Sparta, was subdued by a handful of peasants, and
which became the terror of Asia.

The monarchy of Cyrus was conquered by thirty thousand men, led by a
prince poorer than the meanest of Persian Satraps: in like manner the
Scythians, the poorest of all nations, were able to resist the most
powerful monarchs of the universe. When two famous republics contended
for the empire of the world, the one rich and the other poor, the
former was subdued by the latter. The Roman empire in its turn, after
having engulfed all the riches of the universe, fell a prey to peoples
who knew not even what riches were. The Franks conquered the Gauls, and
the Saxons England, without any other treasures than their bravery and
their poverty. A band of poor mountaineers, whose whole cupidity was
confined to the possession of a few sheep-skins, having first given a
check to the arrogance of Austria, went on to crush the opulent and
formidable house of Burgundy, which at that time made the potentates
of Europe tremble. In short, all the power and wisdom of the heir of
Charles the Fifth, backed by all the treasures of the Indies, broke
before a few herring-fishers. Let our politicians condescend to lay
aside their calculations for a moment, to reflect on these examples;
let them learn for once that money, though it buys everything else,
cannot buy morals and citizens. What then is the precise point in
dispute about luxury? It is to know which is most advantageous to
empires, that their existence should be brilliant and momentary,
or virtuous and lasting? I say brilliant, but with what lustre! A
taste for ostentation never prevails in the same minds as a taste
for honesty. No, it is impossible that understandings, degraded by a
multitude of futile cares, should ever rise to what is truly great and
noble; even if they had the strength, they would want the courage.

Every artist loves applause. The praise of his contemporaries is the
most valuable part of his recompense. What then will he do to obtain
it, if he have the misfortune to be born among a people, and at a
time, when learning is in vogue, and the superficiality of youth is
in a position to lead the fashion; when men have sacrificed their
taste to those who tyrannise over their liberty, and one sex dare not
approve anything but what is proportionate to the pusillanimity of
the other;[3] when the greatest masterpieces of dramatic poetry are
condemned, and the noblest of musical productions neglected? This is
what he will do. He will lower his genius to the level of the age, and
will rather submit to compose mediocre works, that will be admired
during his life-time, than labour at sublime achievements which will
not be admired till long after he is dead. Let the famous Voltaire tell
us how many nervous and masculine beauties he has sacrificed to our
false delicacy, and how much that is great and noble, that spirit of
gallantry, which delights in what is frivolous and petty, has cost him.

It is thus that the dissolution of morals, the necessary consequence of
luxury, brings with it in its turn the corruption of taste. Further, if
by chance there be found among men of average ability, an individual
with enough strength of mind to refuse to comply with the spirit of
the age, and to debase himself by puerile productions, his lot will
be hard. He will die in indigence and oblivion. This is not so much a
prediction, as a fact already confirmed by experience! Yes, Carle and
Pierre Vanloo, the time is already come when your pencils, destined to
increase the majesty of our temples by sublime and holy images, must
fall from your hands, or else be prostituted to adorn the panels of a
coach with lascivious paintings. And you, inimitable Pigal, rival of
Phidias and Praxiteles, whose chisel the ancients would have employed
to carve them gods, whose images almost excuse their idolatry in our
eyes; even your hand must condescend to fashion the belly of an ape, or
else remain idle.

We cannot reflect on the morality of mankind without contemplating with
pleasure the picture of the simplicity which prevailed in the earliest
times. This image may be justly compared to a beautiful coast, adorned
only by the hands of nature; towards which our eyes are constantly
turned, and which we see receding with regret. While men were innocent
and virtuous and loved to have the gods for witnesses of their actions,
they dwelt together in the same huts; but when they became vicious,
they grew tired of such inconvenient onlookers, and banished them to
magnificent temples. Finally, they expelled their deities even from
these, in order to dwell there themselves; or at least the temples
of the gods were no longer more magnificent than the palaces of the
citizens. This was the height of degeneracy; nor could vice ever be
carried to greater lengths than when it was seen, supported, as it
were, at the doors of the great, on columns of marble, and graven on
Corinthian capitals.

As the conveniences of life increase, as the arts are brought to
perfection, and luxury spreads, true courage flags, the virtues
disappear; and all this is the effect of the sciences and of those
arts which are exercised in the privacy of men's dwellings. When the
Goths ravaged Greece, the libraries only escaped the flames owing to an
opinion that was set on foot among them, that it was best to leave the
enemy with a possession so calculated to divert their attention from
military exercises, and keep them engaged in indolent and sedentary
occupations.

Charles the Eighth found himself master of Tuscany and the kingdom of
Naples, almost without drawing sword; and all his court attributed
this unexpected success to the fact that the princes and nobles of
Italy applied themselves with greater earnestness to the cultivation
of their understandings than to active and martial pursuits. In fact,
says the sensible person who records these characteristics, experience
plainly tells us, that in military matters and all that resemble them
application to the sciences tends rather to make men effeminate and
cowardly than resolute and vigorous.

The Romans confessed that military virtue was extinguished among them,
in proportion as they became connoisseurs in the arts of the painter,
the engraver and the goldsmith, and began to cultivate the fine arts.
Indeed, as if this famous country was to be for ever an example to
other nations, the rise of the Medici and the revival of letters has
once more destroyed, this time perhaps for ever, the martial reputation
which Italy seemed a few centuries ago to have recovered.

The ancient republics of Greece, with that wisdom which was so
conspicuous in most of their institutions, forbade their citizens
to pursue all those inactive and sedentary occupations, which by
enervating and corrupting the body diminish also the vigour of the
mind. With what courage, in fact, can it be thought that hunger and
thirst, fatigues, dangers and death, can be faced by men whom the
smallest want overwhelms and the slightest difficulty repels? With what
resolution can soldiers support the excessive toils of war, when they
are entirely unaccustomed to them? With what spirits can they make
forced marches under officers who have not even the strength to travel
on horseback? It is no answer to cite the reputed valour of all the
modern warriors who are so scientifically trained. I hear much of their
bravery in a day's battle; but I am told nothing of how they support
excessive fatigue, how they stand the severity of the seasons and the
inclemency of the weather. A little sunshine or snow, or the want
of a few superfluities, is enough to cripple and destroy one of our
finest armies in a few days. Intrepid warriors I permit me for once to
tell you the truth, which you seldom hear. Of your bravery I am fully
satisfied. I have no doubt that you would have triumphed with Hannibal
at Cannæ, and at Trasimene: that you would have passed the Rubicon
with Cæsar, and enabled him to enslave his country; but you never would
have been able to cross the Alps with the former, or with the latter to
subdue your own ancestors, the Gauls.

A war does not always depend on the events of battle: there is in
generalship an art superior to that of gaining victories. A man may
behave with great intrepidity under fire, and yet be a very had
officer. Even in the common soldier, a little more Strength and vigour
would perhaps be more useful than so much courage, which after all is
no protection from death. And what does it matter to the State whether
its troops perish by cold and fever, or by the sword of the enemy?

If the cultivation of the sciences is prejudicial to military
qualities, it is still more so to moral qualities. Even from our
infancy an absurd system of education serves to adorn our wit and
corrupt our judgment. We see, on every side, huge institutions, where
our youth are educated at great expense, and instructed in everything
but their duty. Your children will be ignorant of their own language,
when they can talk others which are not spoken anywhere. They will be
able to compose verses which they can hardly understand; and, without
being capable of distinguishing truth from error, they will possess
the art of making them unrecognisable by specious arguments. But
magnanimity, equity, temperance, humanity and courage will be words of
which they know not the meaning. The dear name of country will never
strike on their ears; and if they ever hear speak of God,[4] it will
be less to fear, than to be frightened of Him. I would as soon, said a
wise man, that my pupil had spent his time in the tennis court as in
this manner; for there his body at least would have got exercise.

I well know that children ought to be kept employed, and that idleness
is for them the danger most to be feared. But what should they be
taught? This is undoubtedly an important question. Let them be taught
what they are to practise when they come to be men;[5] not what they
ought to forget.

Our gardens are adorned with statues and our galleries with pictures.
What would you imagine these masterpieces of art, thus exhibited to
public admiration, represent? The great men, who have defended their
country, or the still greater men who have enriched it by their
virtues? Far from it. They are the images of every perversion of heart
and mind, carefully selected from ancient mythology, and presented
to the early curiosity of our children, doubtless that they may have
before their eyes the representations of vicious actions, even before
they are able to read.

Whence arise all those abuses, unless it be from that fatal inequality
introduced among men by the difference of talents and the cheapening
of virtue? This is the most evident effect of all our studies, and the
most dangerous of all their consequences. The question is no longer
whether a man is honest, but whether he is clever. We do not ask
whether a book is useful, but whether it is well-written. Rewards are
lavished on wit and ingenuity, while virtue is left unhonoured. There
are a thousand prizes for fine discourses, and none for good actions.
I should be glad, however, to know whether the honour attaching to the
best discourse that ever wins the prize in this Academy is comparable
with the merit of having founded the prize.

A wise man does not go in chase of fortune; but he is by no means
insensible to glory, and when he sees it so ill distributed, his
virtue, which might have been animated by a little emulation, and
turned to the advantage of society, droops and dies away in obscurity
and indigence. It is for this reason that the agreeable arts must in
time everywhere be preferred to the useful; and this truth has been but
too much confirmed since the revival of the arts and sciences. We have
physicists, geometricians, chemists, astronomers, poets, musicians, and
painters in plenty; but we have no longer a citizen among us; or if
there be found a few scattered over our abandoned countryside, they are
left to perish there unnoticed and neglected. Such is the condition to
which we are reduced, and such are our feelings towards those who give
us our daily bread, and our children milk.

I confess, however, that the evil is not so great as it might
have become. The eternal providence, in placing salutary simples
beside noxious plants, and making poisonous animals contain their
own antidote, has taught the sovereigns of the earth, who are its
ministers, to imitate its wisdom. It is by following this example that
the truly great monarch, to whose glory every age will add new lustre,
drew from the very bosom of the arts and sciences, the very fountains
of a thousand lapses from rectitude, those famous societies, which,
while they are depositaries of the dangerous trust of human knowledge,
are yet the sacred guardians of morals, by the attention they pay to
their maintenance among themselves in all their purity, and by the
demands which they make on every member whom they admit.

These wise institutions, confirmed by his august successor and
imitated by all the kings of Europe, will serve at least to restrain
men of letters, who, all aspiring to the honour of being admitted
into these Academies, will keep watch over themselves, and endeavour
to make themselves worthy of such honour by useful performances and
irreproachable morals. Those Academies also, which, in proposing prizes
for literary merit, make choice of such subjects as are calculated to
arouse the love of virtue in the hearts of citizens, prove that it
prevails in themselves, and must give men the rare and real pleasure of
finding learned societies devoting themselves to the enlightenment of
mankind, not only by agreeable exercises of the intellect, but also by
useful instructions.

An objection which may be made is, in fact, only an additional proof of
my argument. So much precaution proves but too evidently the need for
it. We never seek remedies for evils that do not exist. Why, indeed,
must these bear all the marks of ordinary remedies, on account of their
inefficacy? The numerous establishments in favour of the learned are
only adapted to make men mistake the objects of the sciences, and turn
men's attention to the cultivation of them. One would be inclined to
think, from the precautions everywhere taken, that we are overstocked
with husbandmen, and are afraid of a shortage of philosophers. I
will not venture here to enter into a comparison between agriculture
and philosophy, as they would not bear it. I shall only ask What is
philosophy? What is contained in the writings of the most celebrated
philosophers? What are the lessons of these friends of wisdom. To hear
them, should we not take them for so many mountebanks, exhibiting
themselves in public, and crying out, _Here, Here, come to me, I am
the only true doctor_? One of them teaches that there is no such thing
as matter, but that everything exists only in representation. Another
declares that there is no other substance than matter, and no other
God than the world itself. A third tells you that there are no such
things as virtue and vice, and that moral good and evil are chimeras;
while a fourth informs you that men are only beasts of prey, and may
conscientiously devour one another. Why, my great philosophers, do you
not reserve these wise and profitable lessons for your friends and
children? You would soon reap the benefit of them, nor should we be
under any apprehension of our own becoming your disciples.

Such are the wonderful men, whom their contemporaries held in the
highest esteem during their lives, and to whom immortality has been
attributed since their decease. Such are the wise maxims we have
received from them, and which are transmitted, from age to age, to our
descendants. Paganism, though given over to all the extravagances of
human reason, has left nothing to compare with the shameful monuments
which have been prepared by the art of printing, during the reign of
the gospel. The impious writings of Leucippus and Diagoras perished
with their authors. The world, in their days, was ignorant of the art
of immortalising the errors and extravagancies of the human mind.
But thanks to the art of printing[6] and the use we make of it, the
pernicious reflections of Hobbes and Spinoza will last for ever.
Go, famous writings, of which the ignorance and rusticity of our
forefathers would have been incapable. Go to our descendants, along
with those still more pernicious works which reek of the corrupted
manners of the present age! Let them together convey to posterity
a faithful history of the progress and advantages of our arts and
sciences. If they are read, they will leave not a doubt about the
question we are now discussing, and unless mankind should then be still
more foolish than we, they will lift up their hands to Heaven and
exclaim in bitterness of heart: "Almighty God! thou who holdest in Thy
hand the minds of men, deliver us from the fatal arts and sciences of
our forefathers; give us back ignorance, innocence and poverty, which
alone can make us happy and are precious in Thy sight."

But if the progress of the arts and sciences has added nothing to our
real happiness; if it has corrupted our morals, and if that corruption
has vitiated our taste, what are we to think of the herd of text-book
authors, who have removed those impediments which nature purposely laid
in the way to the Temple of the Muses, in order to guard its approach
and try the powers of those who might be tempted to seek knowledge?
What are we to think of those compilers who have indiscreetly broken
open the door of the sciences, and introduced into their sanctuary a
populace unworthy to approach it, when it was greatly to be wished that
all who should be found incapable of making a considerable progress in
the career of learning should have been repulsed at the entrance, and
thereby cast upon those arts which are useful to society. A man who
will be all his life a bad versifier, or a third-rate geometrician,
might have made nevertheless an excellent clothier. Those whom nature
intended for her disciples have not needed masters. Bacon, Descartes
and Newton, those teachers of mankind, had themselves no teachers.
What guide indeed could have taken them so far as their sublime
genius directed them? Ordinary masters would only have cramped their
intelligence, by confining it within the narrow limits of their own
capacity. It was from the obstacles they met with at first, that they
learned to exert themselves, and bestirred themselves to traverse the
vast field which they covered. If it be proper to allow some men to
apply themselves to the study of the arts and sciences, it is only
those who feel themselves able to walk alone in their footsteps and to
outstrip them. It belongs only to these few to raise monuments to the
glory of the human understanding. But if we are desirous that nothing
should be above their genius, nothing should be beyond their hopes.
This is the only encouragement they require. The soul insensibly adapts
itself to the objects on which it is employed, and thus it is that
great occasions produce great men. The greatest orator in the world
was Consul of Rome, and perhaps the greatest of philosophers Lord
Chancellor of England. Can it be conceived that, if the former had
only been a professor at some University, and the latter a pensioner
of some Academy, their works would not have suffered from their
situation. Let not princes disdain to admit into their councils those
who are most capable of giving them good advice. Let them renounce the
old prejudice, which was invented by the pride of the great, that the
art of governing mankind is more difficult than that of instructing
them; as if it was easier to induce men to do good voluntarily, than
to compel them to it by force. Let the learned of the first rank find
an honourable refuge in their courts; let them there enjoy the only
recompense worthy of them, that of promoting by their influence the
happiness of the peoples they have enlightened by their wisdom. It is
by this means only that we are likely to see what virtue, science and
authority can do, when animated by the noblest emulation, and working
unanimously for the happiness of mankind.

But so long as power alone is on one side, and knowledge and
Understanding alone on the other, the learned will seldom make great
objects their study, princes will still more rarely do great actions,
and the peoples will continue to be, as they are, mean, corrupt and
miserable.

As for us, ordinary men, on whom Heaven has not been pleased to bestow
such great talents; as we are not destined to reap such glory, let
us remain in our obscurity. Let us not covet a reputation we should
never attain, and which, in the present state of things, would never
make up to us for the trouble it would have cost us, even if we were
fully qualified to obtain it. Why should we build our happiness on the
opinions of others, when we can find it in our own hearts? Let us leave
to others the task of instructing mankind in their duty, and confine
ourselves to the discharge of our own. We have no occasion for greater
knowledge than this.

Virtue! sublime science of simple minds, are such industry and
preparation needed if we are to know you? Are not your principles
graven on every heart? Need we do more, to learn your laws, than
examine ourselves, and listen to the voice of conscience, when the
passions are silent?

This is the true philosophy, with which we must learn to be content,
without envying the fame of those celebrated men, whose names are
immortal in the republic of letters. Let us, instead of envying them,
endeavour to make, between them and us, that honourable distinction
which was formerly seen to exist between two great peoples, that the
one knew how to speak, and the other how to act, aright.


[1] It is easy to see the allegory in the fable of Prometheus: and it
does not appear that the Greeks, who chained him to the Caucasus, had a
better opinion of him than the Egyptians had of their god Theutus. The
Satyr, says an ancient fable, the first time he saw a fire, was going
to kiss and embrace it; but Prometheus cried out to him to forbear, or
his beard would rue it. It burns, says he, everything that touches it.

[2] The less we know, the more we think we know. The peripatetics
doubted of nothing. Did not Descartes construct the universe with cubes
and vortices? And is there in all Europe one single physicist who does
not boldly explain the inexplicable mysteries of electricity, which
will, perhaps, be for ever the despair of real philosophers?

[3] I am far from thinking that the ascendancy which women have
obtained over men is an evil in itself. It is a present which nature
has made them for the good of mankind. If better directed, it might
be productive of as much good, as it is now of evil. We are not
sufficiently sensible of what advantage it would be to society to
give a better education to that half of our species which governs the
other. Men will always be what women choose to make them. If you wish
then that they should be noble and virtuous, let women be taught what
greatness of soul and virtue are. The reflections which this subject
arouses, and which Plato formerly made, deserve to be more fully
developed by a pen worthy of following so great a master, and defending
so great a cause.

[4] Pensées philosophiques (Diderot).

[5] Such was the education of the Spartans with regard to one of the
greatest of their-kings. It is well worthy of notice, says Montaigne,
that the excellent institutions of Lycurgus, which were in truth
miraculously perfect, paid as much attention to the bringing up of
youth as if this were their principal object, and yet, at the very seat
of the Muses, they make so little mention of learning that it seems as
if their generous-spirited youth disdained every other restraint, and
required, instead of masters of the sciences, instructors in valour,
prudence and justice alone.

Let us hear next what the same writer says of the ancient Persians.
Plato, says he, relates that the heir to the throne was thus brought
up. At his birth he was committed, not to the care of women, but to
eunuchs in the highest authority and near the person of the king, on
account of their virtue. These undertook to render his body beautiful
and healthy. At seven years of age they taught him to ride and go
hunting. At fourteen he was placed in the hands of four, the wisest,
the most just, the most temperate and the bravest persons in the
kingdom. The first instructed him in religion, the second taught him to
adhere inviolably to truth, the third to conquer his passions, and the
fourth to be afraid of nothing. All, I may add, taught him to be a good
man; but not one taught him to be learned.

Astyages, in Xenophon, desires Cyrus to give him an account of his
last lesson. It was this, answered Cyrus, one of the big boys, of the
school having a small coat, gave it to a little boy and took away from
him his coat, which was larger. Our master having appointed me arbiter
in the dispute, I ordered that matters should stand as they were, as
each boy seemed to be better suited than before. The master, however,
remonstrated with me, saying that I considered only convenience,
whereas justice ought to have been the first concern, and justice
teaches that no one should suffer forcible interference with what
belongs to him. He added that he was punished for his wrong decision,
just as boys are punished in our country schools when they forget the
first aorist of _τύπτω_. My tutor must make me a fine harangue, _in
genere demonstrative_, before he will persuade me that his school is as
good as this.

[6] If we consider the frightful disorders which printing has already
caused in Europe, and judge of the future by the progress of its evils
from day to day, it is easy to foresee that sovereigns will hereafter
take as much pains to banish this dreadful art from their dominions,
as they ever took to encourage it The Sultan Achmet, yielding to the
importunities of certain pretenders to taste, consented to have a press
erected at Constantinople; but it was hardly set to work before they
were obliged to destroy it, and throw the plant into a well.

It is related that the Caliph Omar, being asked what should be done
with the library at Alexandria, answered in these words. "If the books
in the library contain anything contrary to the Alcoran, they are evil
and ought to be burnt; if they contain only what the Alcoran teaches,
they are superfluous." This reasoning has been cited by oar men of
letters as the height of absurdity; but if Gregory the Great had been
in the place of Omar, and the Gospel in the place of the Alcoran, the
library would still have been burnt, and it would have been perhaps the
finest action of his life.




A DISCOURSE

ON A SUBJECT PROPOSED BY THE ACADEMY OF DIJON:

WHAT IS THE ORIGIN OF INEQUALITY AMONG MEN, AND IS IT AUTHORISED BY
NATURAL LAW?

_Non in depravatis, sed in his qua bene secundum naturam se habent,
considerandum est quid sit naturale._

Aristotle, Politics, Bk. i, ch. 2.

[We should consider what is natural not in things which are depraved
but in those which are rightly ordered according to nature.]




DEDICATION

TO THE

REPUBLIC OF GENEVA


MOST HONOURABLE, MAGNIFICENT AND SOVEREIGN LORDS, convinced that
only a virtuous citizen can confer on his country honours which it
can accept, I have been for thirty years past working to make myself
worthy to offer you some public homage; and, this fortunate opportunity
supplementing in some degree the insufficiency of my efforts, I have
thought myself entitled to follow in embracing it the dictates of the
zeal which inspires me, rather than the right which should have been my
authorisation. Having had the happiness to be born among you, how could
I reflect on the equality which nature has ordained between men, and
the inequality which they have introduced, without reflecting on the
profound wisdom by which both are in this State happily combined and
made to coincide, in the manner that is most in conformity with natural
law, and most favourable to society, to the maintenance of public order
and to the happiness of individuals? In my researches after the best
rules common sense can lay down for the constitution of a government,
I have been so struck at finding them all in actuality in your own,
that even had I not been born within your walls I should have thought
it indispensable for me to offer this picture of human society to that
people, which of all others seems to be possessed of its greatest
advantages, and to have best guarded against its abuses.

If I had had to make choice of the place of my birth, I should have
preferred a society which had an extent proportionate to the limits
of the human faculties; that is, to the possibility of being well
governed: in which every person being equal to his occupation, no one
should be obliged to commit to others the functions with which he was
entrusted: a State, in which all the individuals being well known to
one another, neither the secret machinations of vice, nor the modesty
of virtue should be able to escape the notice and judgment of the
public; and in which the pleasant custom of seeing and knowing one
another should make the love of country rather a love of the citizens
than of its soil.

I should have wished to be born in a country in which the interest of
the Sovereign and that of the people must be single and identical; to
the end that all the movements of the machine might tend always to
the general happiness. And as this could not be the case, unless the
Sovereign and the people were one and the same person, it follows that
I should have wished to be born under a democratic government, wisely
tempered.

I should have wished to live and die free: that is, so far subject to
the laws that neither I, nor anybody else, should be able to cast off
their honourable yoke: the easy and salutary yoke which the haughtiest
necks bear with the greater docility, as they are made to bear no other.

I should have wished then that no one within the State should be able
to say he was above the law; and that no one without should be able to
dictate so that the State should be obliged to recognise his authority.
For, be the constitution of a government what it may, if there be
within its jurisdiction a single man who is not subject to the law, all
the rest are necessarily at his discretion. And if there be a national
ruler within, and a foreign ruler without, however they may divide
their authority, it is impossible that both should be duly obeyed, or
that the State should be well governed.

I should not have chosen to live in a republic of recent institution,
however excellent its laws; for fear the government, being perhaps
otherwise framed than the circumstances of the moment might require,
might disagree with the new citizens, or they with it, and the State
run the risk of overthrow and destruction almost as soon as it came
into being. For it is with liberty as it is with those solid and
succulent foods, or with those generous wines which are well adapted
to nourish and fortify robust constitutions that are used to them,
but ruin and intoxicate weak and delicate constitutions to which they
are not suited. Peoples once accustomed to masters are not in a
condition to do without them. If they attempt to shake off the yoke,
they still more estrange themselves from freedom, as, by mistaking for
it an unbridled license to which it is diametrically opposed, they
nearly always manage, by their revolutions, to hand themselves over to
seducers, who only make their chains heavier than before. The Roman
people itself, a model for all free peoples, was wholly incapable of
governing itself when it escaped from the oppression of the Tarquins.
Debased by slavery, and the ignominious tasks which had been imposed
upon it, it was at first no better than a stupid mob, which it was
necessary to control and govern with the greatest wisdom; in order
that, being accustomed by degrees to breathe the health-giving air of
liberty, minds which had been enervated or rather brutalised under
tyranny, might gradually acquire that severity of morals and spirit
of fortitude which made it at length the people of all most worthy of
respect. I should, then, have sought out for my country some peaceful
and happy Republic, of an antiquity that lost itself, as it were, in
the night of time: which had experienced only such shocks as served to
manifest and strengthen the courage and patriotism of its subjects; and
whose citizens, long accustomed to a wise independence, were not only
free, but worthy to be so.

I should have wished to choose myself a country, diverted, by a
fortunate impotence, from the brutal love of conquest, and secured, by
a still more fortunate situation, from the fear of becoming itself the
conquest of other States: a free city situated between several nations,
none of which should have any interest in attacking it, while each
had an interest in preventing it from being attacked by the others;
in short, a Republic which should have nothing to tempt the ambition
of its neighbours, but might reasonably depend on their assistance in
case of need. It follows that a republican State so happily situated
could have nothing to fear but from itself; and that, if its members
trained themselves to the use of arms, it would be rather to keep alive
that military ardour and courageous spirit which are so proper among
free-men, and tend to keep up their taste for liberty, than from the
necessity of providing for their defence.

I should have sought a country, in which the right of legislation
was vested in all the citizens; for who can judge better than they of
the conditions under which they had best dwell together in the same
society? Not that I should have approved of Plebiscita, like those
among the Romans; in which the rulers in the State, and those most
interested in its preservation, were excluded from the deliberations on
which in many cases its security depended; and in which, by the most
absurd inconsistency, the magistrates were deprived of rights which the
meanest citizens enjoyed.

On the contrary, I should have desired that, in order to prevent
self-interested and ill-conceived projects, and all such dangerous
innovations as finally ruined the Athenians, each man should not be at
liberty to propose new laws at pleasure; but that this right should
belong exclusively to the magistrates; and that even they should use it
with so much caution, the people, on its side, be so reserved in giving
its consent to such laws, and the promulgation of them be attended
with so much solemnity, that before the constitution could be upset by
them, there might be time enough for all to be convinced, that it is
above all the great antiquity of the laws which makes them sacred and
venerable, that men soon learn to despise laws which they see daily
altered, and that States, by accustoming themselves to neglect their
ancient customs under the pretext of improvement, often introduce
greater evils than those they endeavour to remove.

I should have particularly avoided, as necessarily ill-governed, a
Republic in which the people, imagining themselves in a position
to do without magistrates, or at least to leave them with only a
precarious authority, should imprudently have kept for themselves the
administration of civil affairs and the execution of their own laws.
Such must have been the rude constitution of primitive governments,
directly emerging from a state of nature; and this was another of the
vices that contributed to the downfall of the Republic of Athens.

But I should have chosen a community in which the individuals,
content with sanctioning their laws, and deciding the most important
public affairs in general assembly and on the motion of the rulers,
had established honoured tribunals, carefully distinguished the
several departments, and elected year by year some of the most
capable and upright of their fellow-citizens to administer justice
and govern the State; a community, in short, in which the virtue of
the magistrates thus bearing witness to the wisdom of the people,
each class reciprocally did the other honour. If in such a case any
fatal misunderstandings arose to disturb the public peace, even these
intervals of blindness and error would bear the marks of moderation,
mutual esteem, and a common respect for the laws; which are sure signs
and pledges of a reconciliation as lasting as sincere. Such are the
advantages, most honourable, magnificent and sovereign lords, which I
should have sought in the country in which I should have chosen to be
born. And if providence had added to all these a delightful situation,
a temperate climate, a fertile soil, and the most beautiful countryside
under Heaven, I should have desired only, to complete my felicity, the
peaceful enjoyment of all these blessings, in the bosom of this happy
country; to live at peace in the sweet society of my fellow-citizens,
and practising towards them, from their own example, the duties of
friendship, humanity, and every other virtue, to leave behind me the
honourable memory of a good man, and an upright and virtuous patriot.

But, if less fortunate or too late grown wise, I had seen myself
reduced to end an infirm and languishing life in other climates, vainly
regretting that peaceful repose which I had forfeited in the imprudence
of youth, I should at least have entertained the same feelings in my
heart, though denied the opportunity of making use of them in my native
country. Filled with a tender and disinterested love for my distant
fellow-citizens, I should have addressed them from my heart, much in
the following terms.

"My dear fellow-citizens, or rather my brothers, since the ties of
blood, as well as the laws, unite almost all of us, it gives me
pleasure that I cannot think of you, without thinking, at the same
time, of all the blessings you enjoy, and of which none of you,
perhaps, more deeply feels the value than I who have lost them. The
more I reflect on your civil and political condition, the less can I
conceive that the nature of human affairs could admit of a better.
In all other governments, when there is a question of ensuring the
greatest good of the State, nothing gets beyond projects and ideas, or
at best bare possibilities. But as for you, your happiness is complete,
and you have nothing to do but enjoy it; you require nothing more to be
made perfectly happy, than to know how to be satisfied with being so.
Your sovereignty, acquired or recovered by the sword, and maintained
for two centuries past by your valour and wisdom, is at length fully
and universally acknowledged. Your boundaries are fixed, your rights
confirmed and your repose secured by honourable treaties. Your
constitution is excellent, being not only dictated by the profoundest
wisdom, but guaranteed by great and friendly powers. Your State enjoys
perfect tranquillity; you have neither wars nor conquerors to fear; you
have no other master than the wise laws you have yourselves made; and
these are administered by upright magistrates of your own choosing. You
are neither so wealthy as to be enervated by effeminacy, and thence
to lose, in the pursuit of frivolous pleasures, the taste for real
happiness and solid virtue; nor poor enough to require more assistance
from abroad than your own industry is sufficient to procure you. In the
meantime the precious privilege of liberty, which in great nations is
maintained only by submission to the most exorbitant impositions, costs
you hardly anything for its preservation.

May a Republic, so wisely and happily constituted, last for ever, for
an example to other nations, and for the felicity of its own citizens!
This is the only prayer you have left to make, the only precaution
that remains to be taken. It depends, for the future, on yourselves
alone (not to make you happy, for your ancestors have saved you that
trouble), but to render that happiness lasting, by your wisdom in
its enjoyment. It is on your constant union, your obedience to the
laws, and your respect for their ministers, that your preservation
depends. If there remains among you the smallest trace of bitterness
or distrust, hasten to destroy it, as an accursed leaven which sooner
or later must bring misfortune and ruin on the State. I conjure you
all to look into your hearts, and to hearken to the secret voice
of conscience. Is there any among you who can find, throughout the
universe, a more upright, more enlightened and more honourable body
than your magistracy? Do not all its members set you an example of
moderation, of simplicity of manners, of respect for the laws, and of
the most sincere harmony? Place, therefore, without reserve, in such
wise superiors, that salutary confidence which reason ever owes to
virtue. Consider that they are your own choice, that they justify that
choice, and that the honours due to those whom you have dignified are
necessarily yours by reflexion. Not one of you is so ignorant as not to
know that, when the laws lose their force and those who defend them
their authority, security and liberty are universally impossible. Why,
therefore, should you hesitate to do that cheerfully and with just
confidence which you would all along have been bound to do by your true
interest, your duty and reason itself?

Let not a culpable and pernicious indifference to the maintenance
of the constitution ever induce you to neglect, in case of need,
the prudent advice of the most enlightened and zealous of your
fellow-citizens; but let equity, moderation and firmness of resolution
continue to regulate all your proceedings, and to exhibit you to the
whole universe as the example of a valiant and modest people, jealous
equally of their honour and of their liberty. Beware particularly, as
the last piece of advice I shall give you, of sinister constructions
and venomous rumours, the secret motives of which are often more
dangerous than the actions at which they are levelled. A whole house
will be awake and take the first alarm given by a good and trusty
watch-dog, who barks only at the approach of thieves; but we hate the
importunity of those noisy curs, which are perpetually disturbing the
public repose, and whose continual ill-timed warnings prevent our
attending to them, when they may perhaps be necessary."

And you, most honourable and magnificent lords, the worthy and revered
magistrates of a free people, permit me to offer you in particular
my duty and homage. If there is in the world a station capable of
conferring honour on those who fill it, it is undoubtedly that
which virtue and talents combine to bestow, that of which you have
made yourselves worthy, and to which you have been promoted by your
fellow-citizens. Their worth adds a new lustre to your own; while, as
you have been chosen, by men capable of governing others, to govern
themselves, I cannot but hold you as much superior to all other
magistrates, as a free people, and particularly that over which you
have the honour to preside, is by its wisdom and its reason superior to
the populace of other States.

Be it permitted me to cite an example of which there ought to have
existed better records, and one which will be ever near to my heart.
I cannot recall to mind, without the sweetest emotions, the memory of
that virtuous citizen, to whom I owe my being, and by whom I was often
instructed, in my infancy, in the respect which is due to you. I see
him still, living by the work of his hands, and feeding his soul on the
sublimest truths. I see the works of Tacitus, Plutarch and Grotius,
lying before him in the midst of the tools of his trade. At his side
stands his dear son, receiving, alas with too little profit, the tender
instructions of the best of fathers. But, if the follies of youth made
me for a while forget his wise lessons, I have at length the happiness
to be conscious that, whatever propensity one may have to vice, it is
not easy for an education, with which love has mingled, to be entirely
thrown away.

Such, my most honourable and magnificent lords, are the citizens, and
even the common inhabitants of the State which you govern; such are
those intelligent and sensible men, of whom, under the name of workmen
and the people, it is usual, in other nations, to have a low and false
opinion. My father, I own with pleasure, was in no way distinguished
among his fellow-citizens. He was only such as they all are; and yet,
such as he was, there is no country, in which his acquaintance would
not have been coveted, and cultivated even with advantage by men of the
highest character. It would not become me, nor is it, thank Heaven, at
all necessary for me to remind you of the regard which such men have a
right to expect of their magistrates, to whom they are equal both by
education and by the rights of nature and birth, and inferior only, by
their own will, by that preference which they owe to your merit, and,
for giving you, can claim some sort of acknowledgment on your side. It
is with a lively satisfaction I understand that the greatest candour
and condescension attend, in all your behaviour towards them, on that
gravity which becomes the ministers of the law; and that you so well
repay them, by your esteem and attention, the respect and obedience
which they owe to you. This conduct is not only just but prudent; as it
happily tends to obliterate the memory of many unhappy events, which
ought to be buried in eternal oblivion. It is also so much the more
judicious, as it tends to make this generous and equitable people find
a pleasure in their duty; to make them naturally love to do you honour,
and to cause those who are the most zealous in the maintenance of their
own rights to be at the same time the most disposed to respect yours.

