The thoughts which I publish in what follows are the precipitate of 
philosophical investigations which have occupied me for the last 
sixteen years. They concern many subjects: the concepts of meaning, 
of understanding, of a proposition, of logic, the foundations of 
mathematics, states of consciousness, and other things. I have written 
down all these thoughts as remarks , short paragraphs, of which there is 
sometimes a fairly long chain about the same subject, while I some¬ 
times make a sudden change, jumping from one topic to another.—It 
was my intention at first to bring all this together in a book whose 
form I pictured differently at different times. But the essential thing 
was that the thoughts should proceed from one subject to another 
in a natural order and without breaks. 

After several unsuccessful attempts to weld my results together into 
such a whole, I realized that I should never succeed. The best that I 
could write would never be more than philosophical remarks; my 
thoughts were soon crippled if I tried to force them on in any single 

direction against their natural inclination.-And this was, of course, 

connected with the very nature of the investigation. For this compels 
us to travel over a wide field of thought criss-cross in every direction.— 
The philosophical remarks in this book are, as it were, a number of 
sketches of landscapes which were made in the course of these long 
and involved journeyings. 

The same or almost the same points were always being approached 
afresh from different directions, and new sketches made. Very many of 
these were badly drawn or uncharacteristic, marked by all the defects 
of a weak draughtsman. And when they were rejected a number of 
tolerable ones were left, which now had to be arranged and sometimes 
cut down, so that if you looked at them you could get a picture of the 
landscape. Thus this book is really only an album. 

Up to a short time ago I had really given up the idea of publishing 
my work in my lifetime. It used, indeed, to be revived from time to 
time: mainly because I was obliged to learn that my results (which I 
had communicated in lectures, typescripts and discussions), variously misunderstood, more or less mangled or watered down, were in circu¬ 
lation. This stung my vanity and I had difficulty in quieting it. 

Four* years ago I had occasion to re-read my first book (the Tractates 
Loffco-Pbilosophicus ) and to explain its ideas to someone. It 
suddenly seemed to me that I should publish those old thoughts and 
the new ones together: that the latter could be seen in the right light 
only by contrast with and against the background of my old way of 
thinking. 1 

For since beginning to occupy myself with philosophy again, sixteen 
years ago, I have been forced to recognize grave mistakes in what I 
wrote in that first book. I was helped to realize these mistakes—to a 
degree which I myself am hardly able to estimate—by the criticism 
which my ideas encountered from Frank Ramsey, with whom I 
discussed them in innumerable conversations during the last two years 
of his life. Even more than to this—always certain and forcible— 
criticism I am indebted to that which a teacher of this university, 
Mr. P. Sraffa, for - many years unceasingly practised on my thoughts. 

I am indebted to this stimulus for the most consequential ideas of this 
book. 

For more than one reason what I publish here will have points of 
contact with what other people are writing to-day.—If my remarks 
do not bear a stamp which marks them as mine,—I do not wish to lay 
any further claim to them as my property. 

I make them public with doubtful feelings. It is not impossible that 
it should fall to the lot of this work, in its poverty and in the darkness 
of this time, to bring light into one brain or another—but, of course, 
it is not likely. 

I should not like my writing to spare other people the trouble of 
thinking . But, if possible, to stimulate someone to thoughts of his own. 

I should have liked to produce a good book. This has not come 
about, but the time is past in which I could improve it. 
 “Cum ipsi (majores homines) appellabant rem aliquam, et cum 
secundum earn vocem corpus ad aliquid movebant, videbam, et 
tenebam hoc ab eis vocari rem illam, quod sonabant, cum earn vellent 
ostendere. Hoc autem eos velle ex motu corporis aperiebatur: tamquam 
verbis naturalibus omnium gentium, quae hunt vultu et nutu oculorum, 
ceterorumque membrorum actu, et sonitu vocis indicante affectionem 
animi in petendis, habendis, rejiciendis, fugiendisve rebus. Ita verba in 
variis sententiis locis suis posita, et crebro audita, quarum rerum signa 
essent, paulatim colligebam, measque jam voluntates, edomito in eis 
signis ore, per haec enuntiabam.” (Augustine, Confessions , I. 8.) 1 
These words, it seems to me, give us a particular picture of the 
essence of human language. It is this: the individual words in language 

name objects—sentences are combinations of such names.-In this 

picture of language we find the roots of the following idea: Every word 
has a meaning. This meaning is correlated with the word. It is the 
object for which the word stands. 

Augustine does not speak of there being any difference between 
kinds of word. If you describe the learning of language in this way 
you are, I believe, thinking primarily of nouns like “table”, “chair”, 
“bread”, and of people’s names, and only secondarily of the names of 
certain actions and properties; and of the remaining kinds of word as 
something that will take care of itself. 

Now think of the following use of language: I send someone shop- 
ping. I give him a slip marked “five red apples”. He takes the slip to 


1 “When they (my elders) named some object, and accordingly 
moved towards something, I saw this and I grasped that the thing was 
called by the sound they uttered when they meant to point it out. 
Their intention was shewn by their bodily movements, as it were the 
natural language of all peoples: the expression of the face, the play of 
the eyes, the movement of other parts of the body, and the tone of voice 
which expresses our state of mind in seeking, having, rejecting, or 
avoiding something. Thus, as I heard words repeatedly used in their 
proper places in various sentences, I gradually learnt to understand 
what objects they signified; and after I had trained my mouth to form 
these signs, I used them to express my own desires.” 
3 « 

the shopkeeper, who opens the drawer marked “apples”; then he looks 
up the word “red” in a table and finds a colour sample opposite it; 
then he says the series of cardinal numbers—I assume that he knows 
them by heart—up to the word “five” and for each number he takes an 

apple of the same colour as the sample out of the drawer.-It is in 

this and similar ways that one operates with words.-“But how does 

he know where and how he is to look up the word ‘red* and what he is 

to do with the word ‘five’?”--Well, I assume that he acts as I have 

described. Explanations come to an end somewhere.—But what is the 
meaning of the word “five”?—No such thing was in question here, 
only how the word “fi ve” is used. 

z. That philosophical concept of meaning has its place in a 
primitive idea of the way language functions. But one can also say 
that it is the idea of a language more primitive than ours. 

Let us imagine a language for which the description given by 
Augustine is right. The language is meant to serve for communication 
between a builder A and an assistant B. A is building with building- 
stones: there are blocks, pillars, slabs and beams. B has to pass the 
stones, and that in the order in which A needs them. For this 
purpose they use a language consisting of the words “block”, “pillar”, 
“slab”, “beam”. A calls them out;—B brings the stone which he has 

learnt to bring at such-and-such a call.-Conceive this as a complete 

primitive language. 

3. Augustine, we might say, does describe a system of communica¬ 
tion; only not everything that we call language is this system. And one 
has to say this in many cases where the question arises “Is this an 
appropriate description or not?” The answer is: “Yes, it is appropriate, 
but only for this narrowly circumscribed region, not for the whole of 
what you were claiming to describe.” 

It is as if someone were to say: “A game consists in moving objects 
about on a surface according to certain rules . . .”—and we replied: 
You seem to be thinking of board games, but there are others. You 
can make your definition correct by expressly restricting it to those 
games. 

4Imagine a script in which the letters were used to stand for 
sounds, and also as* signs of emphasis and punctuation. (A script can 
be conceived as a language for describing sound-patterns.) Now 
imagine someone interpreting that script as if there were simply a 
correspondence of letters to sounds and as if the letters had not also 
completely different functions. Augustine’s conception of language is 
like such an over-simple conception of the script. 

5. If we look at the example in §1, we may perhaps get an inkling 
how much this general notion of the meaning of a word surrounds the 
working of language with a haze which makes clear vision impossible. 
It disperses the fog to study the phenomena of language in primitive 
kinds of application in which one can command a clear view of the aim 
and functioning of the words. 

A child uses such primitive forms of language when it learns to talk. 
Here the te achin g of language is not explanation, but training. 

6. We could imagine that the language of §2 was the whole language 
of A and B; even the whole language of a tribe. The children are 
brought up to perform these actions, to use these words as they do so, and 
to react in this way to the words of others. 

An important part of the training will consist in the teacher’s pointing 
to the objects, directing the child’s attention to them, and at die same 
time uttering a word; for instance, the word “slab” as he points to that 
shape. (I do not want to call this “ostensive definition”, because the 
child cannot as yet ask what the name is. I will call it “ostensive 

teaching of words”.-1 say that it will form an important part of the 

training, because it is so with human beings; not because it could not 
be imagined otherwise.) This ostensive teaching of word s can be said 
to establish an association between the word and the thing . But what 
does this mean? Well, it may mean various things; but one very likely 
thinks first of all that a picture of the object comes before the child’s 
mind when it hears the word. But now, if this does happen—is it the 
purpose of the word?—Yes, it may be the purpose.—I can imagine 
such a use of words (of series of sounds). (Uttering a word is like 
striking a note on the keyboard of the imagination.) But in the 
language of §2 it is not the purpose of the words to evoke images. 
(It may, of course, be discovered that that helps to attain the actual 
purpose.) 

But if the ostensive teaching has this effect,—am I to say that it effects 
an understanding of the word? Don’t you understand the call “Slab!” 
if you act upon it in such-and-such a way?—Doubtless the ostensive 
teaching helped to bring this about; but only together with a particular 5* 

training. With different training the same ostensive teaching of these 
words would have effected a quite different understanding. 

“I set the brake up by connecting up rod and lever.”—Yes, given 
the whole of the rest of the mechanism. Only in conjunction with that 
is it a brake-lever, and separated from its support it is not even a 
lever; it may be anything, or nothing. 

7. In the practice of the use of language (z) one party calls out the 

words, the other acts on them. In instruction in the language the 
following process will occur: the learner names the objects; that is, 
he utters the word when the teacher points to the stone.—And there 
will be this still simpler exercise: the pupil repeats the words after the 
teacher-both of these being processes resembling language. 

We can also think of the whole process of using words in (2) as 
one of those games by means of which children learn their native 
language. I will call these games “language-games” and will some¬ 
times speak of a primitive language as a language-game. 

And the processes of namin g the stones and of repeating words after 
someone might also be called language-games. Think of much of the 
use of words in games like ring-a-ring-a-roses. 

I shall also call the whole, consisting of language and the actions into 
which it is woven, the “language-game”. 

8. Let us now look at an expansion of language (z). Besides the 
four words “block”, “pillar”, etc., let it contain a series of words used 
as the shopkeeper in (1) used the numerals (it can be the series of letters 
of the alphabet); further, let there be two words, which may as well be 
“there” and “this” (because this roughly indicates their purpose), 
that are used in connexion with a pointing gesture; and finally a 
number of colour samples. A gives an order like: “d—slab—there”. 
At the same time he shews the assistant a colour sample, and when he 
says “there” he points to a place on the building site. From the stock 
of slabs B takes one for each letter of the alphabet up to “d”, of the 
same colour as the sample, and brings them to the place indicated by 
A.—On other occasions A gives the order “this—there”. At “this” 
he points to a building stone. And so on. 

9. When a child learns this language, it has to learn the series of 
‘numerals’ a, b, c,. . . by heart. And it has to learn their use.—Will 
this training include ostensive teaching of the words?—Well, people will, for example, point to slabs and count: “a, b, c slabs”.— 
Some thin g more like the ostensive teaching of the words “block”, 
“pillar”, etc. would be the ostensive teaching of numerals that serve 
not to count but to refer to groups of objects that can be taken in at 
a glance. Children do learn the use of the first five or six cardinal 
numerals in this way. 

Are “there” and “this” also taught ostensively?—Imagine how one 
might perhaps teach their use. One will point to places and things— 
but in this case the pointing occurs in the use of the words too and not 
merely in learning the use.— 

10. Now what do the words of this language signify ?—What is 
supposed to shew what they signify, if not the kind of use they have? 
And we have already described that. So we are asking for the expression 
“This word signifies this ” to be made a part of the description. In 
other words the description ought to take the form: “The word .... 
signifies . . . .”. 

Of course, one can reduce the description of the use of the word 
“slab” to the statement that this word signifies this object. This will 
be done when, for example, it is merely a matter of removing the 
mistaken idea that the word “slab” refers to the shape of building-stone 
that we in fact call a “block”—but the kind of 'referring this is, that is to 
say the use of these words for the rest, is already known. 

Equally one can say that the signs “a”, “b”, etc. signify numbers; 
when for example this removes the mistaken idea that “a”, “b”, “c”, 
play the part actually played in language by “block”, “slab”, “pillar”. 
And one can also say that “c” means this number and not that one; 
when for example this serves to explain that the letters are to be used 
in the order a, b, c, d, etc. and not in the order a, b, d, c. 

But assimilating the descriptions of the uses of words in this way 
cannot make the uses themselves any more like one another. For, as we 
see, they are absolutely unlike. 

11. Think of the tools in a tool-box: there is a hammer, pliers, a 
saw, a screw-driver, a rule, a glue-pot, glue, nails and screws.—The 
functions of words are as diverse as the functions of these objects. 
(And in both cases there are similarities.) 

Of course, what confuses us is the uniform appearance of words when 
we hear them spoken or meet them in script and print. For their 
application is not presented to us so clearly. Especially when we are 
doing philosophy! 
12. It is like looking into the cabin of a locomotive. We see handles 
all looking more or less alike. (Naturally, since they are all supposed to 
be handled.) But one is the handle of a crank which can be moved 
continuously (it regulates the opening of a valve); another is the 
handle of a switch, which has only two effective positions, it is either off 
or on; a third is the handle of a brake-lever, the harder one pulls on it, 
the harder it brakes; a fourth, the handle of a pump: it has an effect only 
so long as it is moved to and fro. 

13. When we say: “Every word in language signifies something” 
we have so far said nothing whatever; unless we have explained 
exactly what distinction we wish to make. (It might be, of course, that 
we wanted to distinguish the words of language (8) from words ‘with¬ 
out meaning* such as occur in Lewis Carroll’s poems, or words like 
“Lilliburlero” in songs.) 

14. Imagine someone’s saying: "All tools serve to modify some¬ 

thing. Thus the hammer modifies the position of the nail, the saw the 
shape of the board, and so on.”—And what is modified by the rule, the 
glue-pot, the nails?—“Our knowledge of a thing’s length, the tempera¬ 
ture of the glue, and the solidity of the box.”-Would anything be 

gained by this assimilation of expressions?— 

15. The word “to signify” is perhaps used in the most straight¬ 
forward way when the object signified is marked with the sign. Suppose 
that the tools A uses in building bear certain marks. When A shews his 
assistant such a mark, he brings the tool that has that mark on it. 

It is in this and more or less similar ways that a name means and is 
given to a thing.—It will often prove useful in philosophy to say to 
ourselves: naming something js ji ke at taching a label to a thing. 

16. What about the colour samples that A shews to JB: are they 
part of the language ? Well, it is as you please. They do not belong 
among the words; yet when I say to someone: “Pronounce the word 
‘the’ ”, you will count the second “the” as part of the sentence. Yet it 
has a role just like that of a colour-sample in language-game (8); that is, 
it is a sample of what the other is meant to say. 

It is most natural, and causes least confusion, to reckon the samples 
among the instruments of the language. 17. It will be possible to say: In language (8) we have different kinds 
of word. For the functions of the word “slab” and the word “block” 
are more alike than those of “slab” and “d”. But how we group 
words into kinds will depend on the aim of the classification,—and on 
our own inclination. 

Think of the different points of view from which one can classify 
tools or chess-men. 

18. Do not be troubled by the fact that languages (2) and (8) 
consist only of orders. If you want to say that this shews them to be 
incomplete, ask yourself whether our language is complete;—whether 
it was so before the symbolism of chemistry and the notation of the 
infini tes imal calculus were incorporated in it; for these are, so to speak, 
suburbs of our language. (And how many houses or streets does it 

I take before a town begins to be a town?) Our la nguage can be seen 
as an ancient city: a maze of little streets and squares, of did and new 
I houses, and of hou ses with additions from various periods; and this 
1 surrounded by a multitude of new boroughs with straight regular 
i streets and uniform houses. 

19. It is easy to imagine a language consisting only of orders and 

'l reports in battle.—Or a language consisting only of questions and 
! expressions for answering yes and no. And innumerable others.- 

And to imagine a language means to imagine a f orm of lif e. 

But what about this: is the call “Slab l” in example (2) a sentence or a 
word?—If a word, surely it has not the same meaning as the like- 
sounding word of our ordinary language, for in §2 it is a call. But if a 
sentence, it is surely not the elliptical sentence: “Slabl” of our 

language.-As far as the first question goes you can call “Slab!” a 

word and also a sentence; perhaps it could be appropriately called a 
‘degenerate sentence’ (as one speaks of a degenerate hyperbola); 
in fact it is our ‘elliptical’ sentence.—But that is surely only a shortened 
form of the sentence “Bring me a slab”, and there is no such sentence in 
example (2).—But why should I not on the contrary have called the 
sentence “Bring me a slab” a lengthening of the sentence “Slab!”?— 
Because if you shout “Slab!” you really mean: “Bring me a slab”.— 
But how do you do this: how do you mean that while you say “Slabl”? 
Do you say the unshortened sentence to yourself? And why should I 
translate the call “Slab!” into a different expression in order to say 
what someone means by it? And if they mean the samp thing—why 
should I not say: “When he says ‘Slab!’ hemeans ‘Slab!”’? Again, if you 
can mean “Bring me the slab”, why should you not be able to mp fl n 
“Slab 1 ”?—-But when I call “Slab I”, then what I want is, that he should 

bring me a slab\ -Certainly, but does ‘wanting this’ consist in thinking 

in some form or other a different sentence from the one you utter?— 

20. But now it looks as if when someone says “Bring me a slab” he 
could mean this expression as one long word corresponding to the single 

word “Slabl”-Then can one mean it sometimes as one word and 

sometimes as four? And how does one usually mean it?-1 think 

we shall be inclined to say: we mean the sentence as four words when we 
use it in contrast with other sentences such as “Hand me a slab”, 
“Bring him a slab”, “Bring two slabs”, etc.; that is, in contrast with 
sentences containing the separate words of our command in other 
combinations.-—But what does using one sentence in contrast with 
others consist in? Do the others, perhaps, hover before one’s mind? 
All of them? And while one is saying the one sentence, or before, or 
afterwards?—No. Even if such an explanation rather tempts us/we 
need only think for a moment of what actually happens in order to see 
that we are going astray here. We say that we use the command in 
contrast with other sentences because our language contains the pos¬ 
sibility of those other sentences. Someone who did not understand our 
language, a foreigner, who had fairly often heard someone giving the 
order: Bring me a slabl”, might believe that this whole series of 
sounds was one word corresponding perhaps to the word for 
building-stone ’ in his language. If he himself had then given this 
order perhaps he would have pronounced it differently, and we should 

say: he pronounces it so oddly because he takes it for a single word._ 

But then, is there not also something, different going on in him when he 
pronounces it,—something corresponding to the fact that he con¬ 
ceives the sentence as a single word?-Either the same thing may go 

on in him, or something different. For what goes on in you when you 
give such an order? Are you conscious of its consisting of four words 
while you are uttering it? Of course you have a mastery of this language 
—which contains those other sentences as well—but is this having a 
mastery something that happens while you are uttering the sentence?— 
And I have admitted that the foreigner will probably pronounce a 
sentence differently if he conceives it differently; but what we call 
his wrong conception need not lie in anything that acco mpanies the 
utterance of the c omman d. The sentence is ‘elliptical’, not because it leaves out something that 
we think when we utter it, but because it is shortened—in comparison 
with a particular paradigm of our grammar.—Of course one might 
object here: “You grant that the shortened and the unshortened 
sentence have the same sense.—What is this sense, then? Isn’t there a 
verbal expression for this sense?”-But doesn’t the fact that sen¬ 

tences have the same sense consist in their having the same use }—(In 
Russian one says “stone red” instead of “the stone is red”; do they feel 
the copula to be missing in the sense, or attach it in thought}) 

21. Imagine a language-game in which A asks and B reports the 
number of slabs or blocks in a pile, or the colours and shapes of the 
building-stones that are stacked in such-and-such a place.—Such a 
report might run: “Five slabs”. Now what is the difference between 
the report or statement “Five slabs” and the order “Five slabs!”?— 
Well, it is the part which uttering these words plays in the language- 
game. No doubt the tone of voice and the look with which they are 
uttered, and much else besides, will also be different. But we could 
also imagine the tone’s being the same—for an order and a report 
can be spoken in a variety of tones of voice and with various expressions 
of face—the difference being only in the application. (Of course, we 
might use the words “statement” and “command” to stand for 
grammatical forms of sentence and intonations; we do in fact call 
“Isn’t the weather glorious to-day?” a question, although it is used as a 
statement.) We could imagine a language in which all statements had 
the form and tone of rhetorical questions; or every command the form 
of the question “Would you like to . . .?”. Perhaps it will then be said: 
“What he says has the form of a question but is really a command”,— 
that is, has die function of a command in the technique of using the 
language. (Similarly one says “You will do this” not as a prophecy 
but as a command. What mak^s it the one or the other?) 

22. Frege’s idea that every assertion contains an assumption, which 
is the thing that is asserted, really rests on the possibility found in our 
language of writing every statement in the form: “It is asserted that 
such-and-such is the case.”—But “that such-and-such is the case” is 
not a sentence in our language—so far it is not a move in the language- 

game. And if I write, not “It is asserted that-”, but “It is asserted: 

such-and-such is the case”, the words “It is asserted” simply become 
superfluous. 

We might very well also write every statement in the form of a question followed by a “Yes”; for instance: “Is it raining? Yes!” 
Would this shew that every statement contained a question? 

Of course we have the right to use an assertion sign in contrast with 
a question-mark, for example, or if we want to distinguish an assertion 
from a fiction or a supposition. If is only a mistake if one thinks that 
the assertion consists of two actions, entertaining and asserting 
(assigning the truth-value, or something of the kind), and that in 
performing these actions we follow the propositional sign roughly as 
we sing from the musical score. Reading the written sentence loud or 
soft is indeed comparable with singing from a musical score, but 
c meaning 9 (thinking) the sentence that is read is not. 

Frege’s assertion sign marks the beginning of the sentence . Thus its 
function is like that of the full-stop. It distinguishes the whole period 
v from a clause within the period. If I hear someone say “it’s raining” but 
do not know whether I have heard the beginning and end of the 
period, so far this sentence does not serve to tell me anything. 

23. But how many kinds of sentence are there? Say assertion, 
question, and command?—There are countless kinds: countless different 
kinds of use of what we call “symbols”, “words”, “sentences”. And 
this multiplicity is not something fixed, given once for all; but new 
types of language, new language-games, as we may say, come into 
existence, and others become obsolete and get forgotten. (We can get a 
rough picture of this from the changes in mathematics.) 

Here the term “language-^/**” is meant to bring into prominence 
the fact that the speaking of language is part of an activity, or of a form 
of life. 

Review the multiplicity of language-games in the following 
examples, and in others: 

Giving orders, and obeying them— 

Describing the appearance of an object, or giving its measurements— 
Constructing an object from a description (a drawing)— 
Reporting an event— 

Speculating about an event— 

Imagine a picture representing a boxer in a particular stance. Now, 
this picture can be used to tell someone how he should stand, should 
hold himself; or how he should not hold himself; or how a particular 
man did stand in such-and-such a place; and so on. One might (using 
the language of chemistry) call this picture a proposition-radical. 
This will be how Frege thought of the “assumption”. Forming and testing a hypothesis— 

Presenting the results of an experiment in tables and diagrams— 
Making up a story; and reading it— 

Play-acting— 

Singing catches— 

Guessing riddles— 

Making a joke; telling it— 

Solving a problem in practical arithmetic— 

Translating from one language into another— 

Asking, thanking, cursing, greeting, praying. 

—It is interesting to compare the multiplicity of the tools in language 
and of the ways they are used, the multiplicity of kinds of word and 
sentence, with what logicians have said about the structure of language. 
(Including the author of the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus .) 

24. If you do not keep the multiplicity of language-games in view 
yon will perhaps be inclined to ask questions like: “What is a question?” 
—Is it the statement that I do not know such-and-such, or the state¬ 
ment that I wish the other person would tell me . . . .? Or is it the 
description of my mental state of uncertainty?—And is the cry “Help I” 
such a description? 

Think how many different kinds of thing are called “description”: 
description of a body’s position bymeans of its co-ordinates; description 
of a facial expression; description of a sensation of touch; of a mood. 

Of course it is possible to substitute the form of statement or 
description for the usual form of question: “I want to know whether 
. . . or “I am in doubt whether . . . .”—but this does not bring the 
different language-games any closer together. 

The significance of such possibilities of transformation, for example 
of turning all statements into sentences beginning “I think” or “I 
believe” (and thus, as it were, into descriptions of my inner life) will 
become clearer in another place. (Solipsism.) 

25. It is sometimes said that animals do not talk because they lack 
the mental capacity. And this means: “they do not think, and that is 
why they do not talk.” But—they simply do not talk. Or to put it 
better: they do not use language—if we except the most primitive forms 
of language.—Commanding, questioning, recounting, chatting, are as 
much a part of our natural history as walking, eating, drinking, playing. 

26. One thinks that learning language consists in giving names to 
objects. Viz, to human beings, to shapes, to colours, to. pains, to 
moods, to numbers, etc.. To repeat—naming is something like 
attaching a label to a thing. One can say that this is preparatory to the 
use of a word. But what is it a preparation fori 

27. "We name things and then we can talk about them: can refer 
to them in talk.”—As if what we did next were given with the mere 
act of naming. As if there were only one thing called "talking about a 
thing”. Whereas in fact we do the most various things with our 
sentences. Think of exclamations alone, with their completely different 
functions. 

Water! 

Away! 

Ow! 

Help! 

Fine! 

No! 

Are you inclined still to call these words "names of objects”? 

In languages (2) and (8) there was no such thing as asking 
something’s name. This, with its correlate, ostensive definition, is, we 
might say, a language-game on its own. That is really to say: we are 
brought up, trained, to ask: "What is that called?”—upon which the 
name is given. And there is also a language-game of inventing a name 
for something, and hence of saying, "This is . . . .” and then using the 
new name. (Thus, for example, children give names to their dolls 
and then talk about them and to them. Think in this connexion how 
singular is the use of a person’s name to call him!) 

. 28. Now one can ostensively define a proper name, the name of a 
colour, the name of a material, a numeral, the name of a point of the 
compass and so on. The definition of the number two, "That is called 
‘two’ ”—pointing to two nuts—is perfectly exact.—But how can two be 
defined like that? The person one gives the definition to doesn’t know 
what one wants to call "two”; he will suppose that "two” is the name 

given to this group of nuts!-He may suppose this; but perhaps he 

does not. He might make the opposite mistake; when I want to assign 
a name to this group of nuts, he might understand it as a numeral. And 
he might equally well take the name of a person, of which I give an 
ostensive definition, as that of a colour, of a race, or even of a point 
of the compass. That is to say: an o stensive definition can be variously 
inter preted in every case. 

29. Perhaps you say: two can only be ostensively defined in this 
way: “This number is called ‘two* For the word “number” here 
shews what place in language, in grammar,' we assign to the word. 
But this means that the word “number” must be explained before the 
ostensive definition can be understood.—The word “number” in the 
definition does indeed shew this place; does shew the post at which we 
station the word. And we can prevent misunderstandings by saying: 
“This colour is called so-and-so”, “This length is called so-and-so”, 
and so on. That is to say: misunderstandings are sometimes averted in 
this way. But is there only one way of taking the word “colour” or 
“length”?—Well, they just need defining.—Defining, then, by means 
of other words! And what about the last definition in this chain? 
(Do not say: “There isn’t a ‘last’ definition”. That is just as if you chose 
to say: “There isn’t a last house in this road; one can always build an 
additional one”.) 

Whether the word “number” is necessary in the ostensive definition 
depends on whether without it the other person takes the definition 
otherwise than I wish. And that will depend on the circumstances 
under which it is given, and on the person I give it to. 

And how he ‘takes’ the definition is seen in the use that he makes of 
the word defined. 30. So one might say: the ostensive definition explains the use— 
the meaning—of the word when the overall role of the word in 
language is clear. Thus if I know that someone means to explain a 
colour-word to me the ostensive definition “That is called ‘sepia’ ” 
will help me to understand the word.—And you can say this, so long as 

Could one define the word “red” by pointing to something that was 
not red?. That would be as if one were supposed to explain the word 
“modest” to someone whose English was weak, and one pointed to 
an arrogant man and said “That man is not modest”. That 
it is ambiguous is no argument against such a method of definition. 
Any definition can be misunderstood. 

But it might well be asked: are we still to call this “definition”?— 
For, of course, even if it has the same practical consequences, the same 
effect on the learner, it plays a different part in the calculus from what we 
ordinarily call “ostensive definition” of the word “red”. you do not forget that all sorts of problems attach to the words “to 
know” or “to be dear”. 

One has already to know (or be able to do) something in order to be 
capable of asking a thing’s name. But what does one have to know? 

31. When one shews someone the king in chess and says: “This is 
the king”, this does not tell him the use of this piece—unless he already 
knows the rules of the game up to this last point: the shape of the king. 
You could imagine his having learnt the rules of the game without ever 
having been shewn an actual piece. The shape of the chessman cor¬ 
responds here to the sound or shape of a word. 

One can also imagine someone’s having learnt the game without 
ever learning or formulating rules. He might have learnt quite simple 
board-games first, by watching, and have progressed to more and 
more complicated ones. He too might be given the explanation “This 
is die king”,—if, for instance, he were being shewn chessmen of a shape 
he was not used to. This explanation again only tells him the use 
of the piece because, as we might say, the place for it was already 
prepared. Or even: we shall only say that it tells him the use, if 
the place is already prepared. And in this case it is so, not because the 
person to whom we give the explanation already knows rules, but 
because in another sense he is already master of a game. 

Consider this farther case: I am explaining chess to someone; and I 
begin by pointing to a chessman and saying: “This is the king; it 
canjtnove like this, .... and so on.”—In this case we shall say: the 
words “This is the king” (or “This is called the ‘king* ”) are a definition 
only if the learner already ‘knows what a piece in a game is\ That is, 
if he has already played other games, or has watched other people 
playing ‘and understood *—and similar things . Further, only under these 
conditions will he be able to ask relevantly in the course of learning the 
game: “What do you call this?”—that is, this piece in a game. 

We may say: only someone who already knows how to do something 
with it can significantly ask a name. 

And we can imagine the person who is asked replying: “Settle the 
name yourself”—and now die one who asked would have to manage 
everything for himself. 

52. Someone coming into a strange country will sometimes learn 
the language of the inhabitants from ostensive definitions that they 
give him; and he will often have to guess the meaning of these 
definitions; and will guess sometimes right, sometimes wrong. 

And now, I think, we can say: Augustine describes the learning of human language as if the child came into a strange country and 
did not understand the language of the country; that is, as if it already 
had a language, only not this one. Or again: as if the child could already 
tbinky only not yet speak. And “think” would here mean something 
like “talk to itself”. 

33. Suppose, however, someone were to object: “It is not true 
that you must already be master of a language in order to understand 
an ostensive definition: all you need—of course!—is to know or 
guess what the person giving the explanation is pointing to. That is, 
whether for example to the shape of the object, or to its colour, or to its 

number, and so on.”-And what does ‘pointing to the shape’, 

‘pointing to the colour’ consist in? Point to a piece of paper.—And now 
point to its shape—now to its colour—now to its number (that sounds 
queer).—How did you do it?—You will say that you ‘meant’ a different 
thing each time you pointed. And if I ask how that is done, you will 
say you concentrated your attention on the colour, the shape, etc. 
But I ask again: how is that done? 

Suppose someone points to a vase and says “Look at that marvellous 
blue—the shape isn’t the point.”—Or: “Look at the marvellous shape— 
the colour doesn’t matter.” Without doubt you will do something 
different when you act upon these two invitations. But do you always 
do the same thing when you direct your attention to the colour? 
Imagine various different cases. To indicate a few: 

“Is this blue the same as the blue over there? Do you see any 
difference?”— 

You are mixing paint and you say “It’s hard to get the blue of this 
sky.” 

“It’s turning fine, you can already see blue sky again.” 

“Look what different effects these two blues have.” 

“Do you see the blue book over there? Bring it here.” 

“This blue signal-light means . . . .” 

“What’s this blue called?—Is it ‘indigo’?” 

You sometimes attend to the colour by putting your hand up to keep 
the outline from view; or by not looking at the outline of die thing; 
sometimes by staring at the object and trying to remember where you 
saw that colour before. 

You attend to the shape, sometimes by tracing it, sometimes by 
screwing up your eyes so as not to see the colour clearly, and in many 
other ways. I want to say: This is the sort of thing that happens while 
one ‘directs one’s attention to this or that’. But it isn’t these things by 
themselves that make us say someone is attending to the shape, the 
colour, and so on. Just as a move in chess doesn't consist simply in 
moving a piece in such-and-such a way on the board—nor yet in one's 
thoughts and feelings as one makes the move: but in the circumstances 
that we call “playing a game of chess”, “solving a chess problem”, 
and so on. 

34. But suppose someone said: “I always do the same thing when 
I attend to the shape: my eye follows the outline and I feel . . . 
And suppose this person to give someone else the ostensive definition 
“That is called a ‘circle’ ”, pointing to a circular object and having all 

these experiences-cannot his hearer still interpret the definition 

differently, even though he sees the other’s eyes following the outline, 
and even though he feels what the other feels? That is to say: this 
‘interpretation’ may also consist in how he now makes use of the 
word; in what he points to, for example, when told: “Point to a 
circle”.—For neither the expression “to intend the definition in such- 
and-such a way” nor the expression “to interpret the definition in 
such-and-such a way” stands for a process which accompanies the 
giving and hearing of the definition. 

35. There are, of course, what can be called “characteristic ex¬ 
periences” of pointing to (e.g.) the shape. For example, following 
the outline with one’s finger or with one’s eyes as one points.—But this 
does not happen in all cases in which I ‘mean the shape’, and no more 
does any other one characteristic process occur in all these cases.— 
Besides, even if something of the sort did recur in all cases, it would 
still depend on the circumstances—that is, on what happened before 
and after the pointing—whether we should say “He pointed to the 
shape and not to the colour”. 

For the words “to point to the shape”, “to mean the shape”, and 
so on, are not used in the same way as these : “to point to this book 
(not to that one), “to point to the chair, not to the table”, and so on.— 
Only think how differently we learn the use of the words “to point 
to this thing”, “to point to that thing”, and on the other hand “to 
point to the colour, not the shape”, “to mean the colour”, and so on. 

To repeat: in certain cases, especially when one points ‘to the shape’ 
or ‘to the number’ there are characteristic experiences and ways of 
pointing—‘characteristic’ because they recur often (not always) when 
shape or number are ‘meant’. But do you also know of an experience 
characteristic of pointing to a piece in a game as a piece in a game ? 
1 The world is everything that is the case.* 

^i.i The world is the totality of facts, not of 

things. 

1. 11 The world is determined by the facts, and by 
these being all the facts. 

1. 12 For the totality of facts determines both what is 
the case, and also all that is not the case. 

1. 13 The facts in logical space are the world. 
1.2 The world divides into facts. 

1. 21 Any one can either be the case or not be the 

case, and everything else remain the same, 

2 What is the case, the fact, is the existence of 
atomic facts. 

2.01 An atomic fact is a combination of objects 

(entities, things). 

2. oil It is essential to a thing that it can be a con- 

stituent part of an atomic fact. 

2.012 In logic nothing is accidental : if a thing can 

occur in an atomic fact the possibility of that 
atomic fact must already be prejudged in the 
thing. 

2.0121 It would, so to speak, appear as an accident, when 
to a thing that could exist alone on its own account, 
subsequently a state of affairs could be made to fit. 
If things can occur in atomic facts, this possi- 
bility must already lie in them. 

(A logical entity cannot be merely possible. 
Logic treats of every possibility, and all possi- 
bilities are its facts.) 

* The decimal figures as numbers of the separate propositions indicate the logical 
importance of the propositions, the emphasis laid upon them in my exposition. 
The propositions «. i, «.2, n.3, etc., are comments on proposition No. n ; the pro- 
positions n.mi^n.rmy etc. , are comments on the proposition No. n.m ; and so on, Just as we cannot think of spatial objects at 
all apart from space, or temporal objects apart 
from time, so we cannot think of any object apart 
from the possibility of its connexion with other 
things. 

If I can think of an object in the context of an 
atomic fact, I cannot think of it apart from the 
possibility of this context. 

2.0122 The thing is independent, in so far as it can 
occur in all possible circumstances, but this form 
of independence is a form of connexion with the 
atomic fact, a form of dependence. (It is im- 
possible for words to occur in two different ways, 
alone and in the proposition.) 

2.0123 If I know an object, then I also know all the 
possibilities of its occurrence in atomic facts. 

(Every such possibility must lie in the nature 
of the object.) 

A new possibility cannot subsequently be 
found. 

2.01231 In order to know an object, I must know not 
its external but all its internal qualities. 

2.0124 If all objects are given, then thereby are all 
possible atomic facts also given. 

2.013 Every thing is, as it were, in a space of possible 

atomic facts. I can think of this space as empty, 
but not of the thing without the space. 

2.0131 A spatial object must lie in infinite space. 
(A point in space is an argument place.) 

A speck in a visual field need not be red, 
but it must have a colour ; it has, so to speak, 
a colour space round it. A tone must have a pitch, the object of the sense of touch a hardness, 

etc. 
2.014 Objects contain the possibility of all states of 

affairs. 
2.0141 The possibility of its occurrence in atomic facts 

is the form of the object. 
2.02 The object is simple. 

2.0201 Every statement about complexes can be analysed 

into a statement about their constituent parts, and 

into those propositions which completely describe 

the complexes. 

2.021 Objects form the substance of the world. 
Therefore they cannot be compound. 

2.0211 If the world had no substance, then whether 
a proposition had sense would depend on whether 
another proposition was true. 

2.0212 It would then be impossible to form a picture 
of the world (true or false). 

2.022 It is clear that however different from the real 
one an imagined world may be, it must have some- 
thing — a form — in common with the real world. 

2.023 This fixed form consists of the objects. 

2.0231 The substance of the world can only determine 
a form and not any material properties. For these 
are first presented by the propositions — first formed 
by the configuration of the objects. 

2.0232 Roughly speaking : objects are colourless. 

2.0233 Two objects of the same logical form are — 
apart from their external properties — only differen- 
tiated from one another in that they are 
different. 

2.02331 Either a thing has properties which no other 
has, and then one can distinguish it straight away 
from the others by a description and refer to it ; 
or, on the other hand, there are several things 
which have the totality of their properties incommon, and then it is quite impossible to point 
to any one of them. 

For if a thing is not distinguished by anything, 
I cannot distinguish it — for otherwise it would be 
distinguished. 

2.024 Substance is what exists independently of what 
is the case. 

2.025 It is form and content. 

2.0251 Space, time and colour (colouredness) are forms 
of objects. 

2.026 Only if there are objects can there be a fixed 
form of the world. 

2.027 The fixed, the existent and the object are 
one. 

2.0271 The object is the fixed, the existent ; the con- 
figuration is the changing, the variable. 

2.0272 The configuration of the objects forms the 
atomic fact. 

2.03 In the atomic fact objects hang one in another, 
like the links of a chain. 

2.031 In the atomic fact the objects are combined in 
a definite way. 

2.032 The way in which objects hang together in 
the atomic fact is the structure of the atomic 
fact. 

2.033 The form is the possibility of the structure. 

2.034 The structure of the fact consists of the structures 
of the atomic facts. 

2.04 The totality of existent atomic facts is the 
world. 

2.05 The totality of existent atomic facts also deter- 
mines which atomic facts do not exist. 

2.06 The existence and non-existence of atomic facts 
is the reality. 

(The existence of atomic facts we also call 
a positive fact, their non-existence a negative 
fact.) 
2.061 Atomic facts are independent of one another. 2.062 From the existence or non-existence of an 
atomic fact we cannot infer the existence or non- 
existence of another. 

2.063 The total reality is the world. 

2.1 We make to ourselves pictures of facts. 

2.11 The picture presents the facts in logical space, 
the existence and non - existence of atomic 
facts. 

2.12 The picture is a model of reality. 

2.13 To the objects correspond in the picture the 
elements of the picture. 

2. 131 The elements of the picture stand, in the picture, 

for the objects. 

2.14 The picture consists in the fact that its elements 
are combined with one another in a definite way. 

2. 141 The picture is a fact. 

2.15 That the elements of the picture are combined 
with one another in a definite way, represents that 
the things are so combined with one another. 

This connexion of the elements of the picture is 
called itsstructure,and the possibility of this structure 
is called the form of representation of the picture. 
2. 151 The form of representation is the possibility that 

the things are combined with one another as are 
the elements of the picture. 

2.1511 Thus the picture is linked with reality ; it reaches 
up to it. 

2.1512 It is like a scale applied to reality. 

2.15121 Only the outermost points of the dividing lines 
touch the object to be measured. 

2.1513 According to this view the representing relation 
which makes it a picture, also belongs to the 
picture. 

2.1514 The representing relation consists of the co- 
ordinations of the elements of the picture and the 
things. 

2.1515 These co-ordinations are as it were the feelers of its elements with which the picture touches 
reality. 
^ 2.16 In order to be a picture a fact must have some- 

thing in common with what it pictures. 

2. 161 In the picture and the pictured there must be 

something identical in order that the one can be a 
picture of the other at all. 

2.17 What the picture must have in common with 

reality in order to be able to represent it after its 
manner — rightly or falsely — is its form of repre- 
sentation. 

2.171 The picture can represent every reality whose 
form it has. 

The spatial picture, everything spatial, the 
coloured, everything coloured, etc. 

2.172 The picture, however, cannot represent its form 
of representation ; it shows it forth. 

2.173 The picture represents its object from without 
(its standpoint is its form of representation), there- 
fore the picture represents its object rightly or 
falsely. 

2.174 But the picture cannot place itself outside of its 
form of representation. 

. 2.18 What every picture, of whatever form, must 

have in common with reality in order to be able to 
represent it at all — rightly or falsely — is the logical 
form, that is, the form of reality. 

^2.181 If the form of representation is the logical form, 

then the picture is called a logical picture. 
2.182 Every picture is also a logical picture. (On the 

other hand, for example, not every picture is spatial.) 

- 2.19 The logical picture can depict the world. 

2.2 The picture has the logical form of representa- 

tion in common with what it pictures. 

^2.201 The picture depicts reality by representing a 

possibility of the existence and non-existence of 
atomic facts. All the same one can say: “I mean that this piece is called the ‘king’, 
not this particular bit of wood I am pointing to”. (Recognizing, 
wishing, remembering, etc. .) 

36. And we do here what we do in a host of similar cases: because 
we cannot specify any one bodily action which we call pointing to the 
shape (as opposed, for example, to the colour), we say that a spiritual 
[mental, intellectual] activity corresponds to these words. 

Where our language suggests a body and there is none: there, 
we should like to say, is a spirit. 

37. What is the relation between name and thing named?—Well, 
what is it? Look at language-game (2) or at another one: there you 
can see the sort of thing this relation consists in. This relation may 
also consist, among many other things, in the fact that hearing the 
name calls before our mind the picture of what is named; and it also 
consists, among other things, in the name’s being written on the thing 
named or being pronounced when that thing is pointed at. 

38. But what, for example, is the word “this” the name of in 
language-game (8) or the word “that” in the ostensive definition 
“that is called . . . .”?—If you do not want to produce confusion you 
will do best not to call these words names at all.—Yet, strange to say, 
the word “this” has been called the only genuine name; so that anything 
else we call a name was one only in an inexact, approximate sense. 

This queer conception springs from a tendency to sublime the logic 
of our language—as one might put it. The proper answer to it is: we 
call very different things “names”; the word “name” is used to 

What is it to mean the words “That is blue” at one time as a statement 
about the object one is pointing to—at another as an explanation of 
the word “blue”? Well, in the second case one really means “That is 
called ‘blue’ ”.—Then can one at one time mean the word “is” as “is 
called” and the word “blue” as “ ‘blue’ ”, and another time mean “is” 
really as “is”? 

It is also possible for someone to get an explanation of the words 
out of what was intended as a piece of information. [Marginal note: 
Here lurks a crucial superstition.] 

Can I say “bububu” and mean “If it doesn’t rain I shall go for a 
walk”?—It is only in a language that I can mean something by some¬ 
thing. This shews clearly that the grammar of “to mean” is not like 
that of the expression “to imagine” and the like. 
characterize many different kinds of use of a word, related to one 
another in many different ways;—but the kind of use that “this” has 
is not among them. 

It is quite true that, in giving an ostensive definition for instance, 
we often point to the object named and say the name. And similarly, 
in giving an ostensive definition for instance, we say the word “this” 
while pointing to a thing. And also the word “this” and a name 
often occupy the same position in a sentence. But it is precisely 
characteristic of a name that it is defined by means of the demonstra¬ 
tive expression “That is N” (or “That is called ‘N’ ”). But do we also 
give the definitions: “That is called ‘this’ ”, or “This is called ‘this’ ”? 

This is connected with the conception of naming as, so to speak, 
an occult process. Naming appears as a queer connexion of a word 
with an object.—And you really get such a queer connexion when the 
philosopher tries to bring out the relation between name and thing by 
staring at an object in front of him and repeating a name or even the 
word “this” innumerable times. For philosophical problems arise 
when language goes on holid ay. And here we may indeed fancy naming 
to be some remarkable act of mind, as it were a baptism of an object. 
And we can also say the word “this” to the object, as it were 
address the object as “this”—a queer use of this word, which doubtless 
only occurs in doing philosophy. 

39. But why does it occur to one to want to make precisely this 
word into a name, when it evidently is not a name?—That is just the 
reason. For one is tempted to make an objection against what is 
ordinarily called a name. It can be put like this: a name ought really to 
signify a simple . And for this one might perhaps give the following 
reasons: The word “Excalibur”, say, is a proper name in the ordinary 
sense. The sword Excalibur consists of parts combined in a particular 
way. If they are combined differently Excalibur does not exist. But 
it is clear that the sentence “Excalibur has a sharp blade” makes sense 
whether Excalibur is still whole or is broken up. But if “Excalibur” is 
the name of an object, this object no longer exists when Excalibur is 
broken in pieces; and as no object would then correspond to the name 
it would have no meaning. But then the sentence “Excalibur has a 
sharp blade” would contain a word that had no meaning, and hence 
the sentence would be nonsense. But it does make sense; so there 
must always be something corresponding to the words of which it 
consists. So the word “Excalibur” must disappear when the sense is 
analysed and its place be taken by words which name simples. It will 
be reasonable to call these words the real names. 

40. Let us first discuss this point of the argument: that a word has 
no meaning if nothing corresponds to it.—It is important to note 
that the word “meaning” is being used illicitly if it is used to signify 
the thing that ‘corresponds" to the word. That is to confound the 
meaning of a name with the hearer of the name. When Mr. N. N. dies 
one says that the bearer of the name dies, not that the meaning dies. 
And it would be nonsensical to say that, for if the name ceased to 
have meaning it would make no sense to say “Mr. N. N. is dead."" 

41. In §15 we introduced proper names into language (8). Now 
suppose that the tool with the name “N” is broken. Not knowing 
this, A gives B the sign “N”. Has this sign meaning now or not?— 
What is B to do*when he is given it?—We have not settled anything 
about this. One might ask: what will he do? Well, perhaps he will 
stand there at a loss, or shew A the pieces. Here one might say: “N” 
has become meaningless; and this expression would mean that the 
sign “N” no longer had a use in our language-game (unless we gave it a 
new one). “N” might also become meaningless because, for whatever 
reason, the tool was given another name and the sign “N” no longer 
used in the language-game.—But we could also imagine a convention 
whereby B has to shake his head in reply if A gives him the sign 
belonging to a tool that is broken.—In this way the command “N” 
might be said to be given a place in the language-game even when the 
tool no longer exists, and the sign “N” to have meaning even when 
its bearer ceases to exist. 

42. But has for instance a name which has never been used for a 

tool also got a meaning in that game?-Let us assume that “X” is 

such a sign and that A gives this sign to B—well, even such signs could 
be given a place in the language-game, and B might have, say, to 
answer them too with a shake of the head. (One could imagine this 
as a sort of joke between them.) 

43. For a large class of cases—though not for all—in which we 
employ the word “meaning” it can be defined thus: the meaning of a 
word is its use in the language. And the meaning of a name is sometimes explained by pointing to its 
bearer. 


44. We said that the sentence “Excalibur has a sharp blade” made 
sense even when Excalibur was broken in pieces. Now this is so 
because in this language-game a name is also used in the absence of 
its bearer. But we can imagine a language-game with names (that is, 
with signs which we should certainly include among names) in which 
they are used only in the presence of the bearer; and so could always be 
replaced by a demonstrative pronoun and the gesture of pointing. 

.45. The demonstrative “this” can never be without a bearer. It 
might be said: “so long as there is a this, the word ‘this’-has a meaning 

too, whether this is simple or complex.”-But that does not make 

the word into a name. On the contrary: for a name is not used with, 
but only explained by means of, the gesture of pointing. 

46. What lies behind the idea that names really signify simples?— 

Socrates says in the Theaetetus: “If I make no mistake, I have heard 

some people say this: there is no definition of the primary elements— 
so to speak—out of which we and everything else are composed; for 
everything that exists 1 in its own right can only be named , no other 

determination is possible, neither that it is nor that it is not .But 

what exists 1 in its own right has to be.named without any other 

determination. In consequence it is impossible to give an account of 
any primary element; for it, nothing is possible but the bare name; 
its name is all it has. But just as what consists of these primary elements 
is itself complex, so the names of the elements become descriptive 
language by being compounded together. For the essence of speech 
is the composition of names.” 

Both Russell's ‘individuals' and my ‘objects' (Tractates Logtco- 
Philosophicus) were such primary elements. 

47. But what are the simple constituent parts of which reality is 
composed?—What are the simple constituent parts of a chair?—The 
bits of wood of which it is made? Or the molecules, or the atoms?— 
“Simple” means: not composite. And here the point is: in what sense 
‘composite'? It makes no sense at all to speak absolutely of the ‘simple 
parts of a chair'. Again: Does my visual image of this tree, of this chair, consist of 
parts? And what are its simple component parts? Multi-colouredness 
is one kind of complexity; another is, for example, that of a broken 
outline composed of straight bits. And a curve can be said to be com¬ 
posed of an ascending and a descending segment. 

If I tell someone without any further explanation: “What I see before 
me now is composite”, he will have the right to ask: “What do you 
mean by ‘composite’? For there are all sorts of things that that can 
meanl”—The question “Is what you see composite?” makes good 
sense if it is already established what kind of complexity—that is, 
which particular use of the word—is in question. If it had been laid 
down that the visual image of a tree was to be called “composite” if 
one saw not just a single trunk, but also branches, then the question 
“Is the visual image of this tree simple or composite?”, and the 
question “What are its simple component parts?”, would have a clear 
sense—a clear use. And of course the answer to the second question 
is not “The branches” (that would be an answer to the grammatical 
question: “What are here called ‘simple component parts’?”) but rather 
a description of the individual branches. 

But isn’t a chessboard, for instance, obviously, and absolutely, 
composite?—You are probably thinking of the composition out of 
thirty-two white and thirty-two black squares. But could we not also 
say, for instance, that it was composed of the colours black and white 
and the schema of squares? And if there are quite different ways of 
looking at it, do you still want to say that the chessboard is absolutely 
‘composite’?—Asking “Is this object composite?” outside a particular 
language-game is like what a boy once did, who had to say whether 
the verbs in certain sentences were in the active or passive voice, and 
who racked his brains over the question whether the verb “to sleep” 
meant something active' or passive. 

We use the word “composite” (and therefore the Word “simple”) 
in an enormous number of different and differently related ways. 
(Is the colour of a square on a chessboard simple, or does it consist 
of pure white and pure yellow? And is white simple, or does it consist 
of the colours of the rainbow?—Is this length of 2 cm. simple, or does 
it consist of two parts, each 1 cm. long? But why not of one bit 
j cm. long, and one bit 1 cm. long measured in the opposite direction?) 

To the philosophical question: “Is the visual image of this tree omposite, and what are its component parts?” the correct answer is: 
“That depends on what you understand by ‘composite’.” (And that is 
of course not an answer but a rejection of the question.) 

48. Let us apply the method of §2 to the account in the Theaefetus. 
Let us consider a language-game for which this account is really valid. 
The language serves to describe combinations of coloured squares 
on a surface. The squares form a complex like a chessboard. There 
are red, green, white and black squares. The words of the language are 
(correspondingly) “R”, “G”, “W”, “B”, and a sentence is a series of 
these words. They describe an arrangement of squares in the order: 


I 

2 

J 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 


And so for instance the sentence “RRBGGGRWW” describes an 
arrangement of this sort: 



Here the sentence is a complex of names, to which corresponds a 
complex of elements. The primary elements are the coloured squares. 
“But are these simple?”—I do not know what else you would have me 
call “the simples”, what would be more natural in this language-game. 
But under other circumstances I should call a monochrome square 
“composite”, consisting perhaps of two rectangles, or of the elements 
colour and shape. But the concept of complexity might also be so 
extended that a smaller area was said to be ‘composed’ of a greater 
area and another one subtracted from it. Compare the ‘composition of forces*, the ‘division* of a line by a point outside it; these expressions 
shew that we are sometimes even inclined to conceive the smaller 
as the result of a composition of greater parts, and the greater as the 
result of a division of the smaller. 

But I do not know whether to say that the figure described by our 
sentence consists of four or of nine elements! Well, does the sentence 
consist of four letters or of nine?—And which are its elements, the 
types of letter, or the letters? Does it matter which we say, so long as 
we avoid misunderstandings in any particular case? 

49. But what does it mean to say that we cannot define (that is, 
describe) these elements, but only name them? This might mean, for 
instance, that when in a limiting case a complex consists of only one 
square, its description is simply the name of the coloured square. 

Here we might say—though this easily leads to all kinds of philo¬ 
sophical superstition—that a sign “R** or “B**, etc. may be sometimes 
a word and sometimes a proposition. But whether it ‘is a word or a 
proposition* depends on die situation in which it is uttered or written. 
For instance, if A has to describe complexes of coloured squares to B 
and he uses the word “R** alone> we shall be able to say that the word 
is a description—a proposition. But if he is memorizing the words 
and their meanings, or if he is teaching someone else the use of the 
words and uttering them in the course of ostensive teaching, we shall 
not say that they are propositions. In this situation the word “R”, 

for instance, is not a description; it names an element-but it would be 

queer to make that a reason for saying that an element can only be 
named! For naming and describing do not stand on the same 
level: naming is a preparation for description. Naming is so far not a 
move in the language-game—any more than putting a piece in its place 
on the board is a move in chess. We may say: nothing has so far been 
done, when a thing has been named. It has not even got a name except 
in the language-game. This was what Frege meant too, when he said 
that a word had meaning only as part of a sentence. 

j o. What does it mean to say that we can attribute neither being nor 
non-being to elements?—One might say: if everything that we call 
“being** and “non-being** consists in the existence and non-existence of 
connexions between elements, it makes no sense to speak of an elements 
being (non-being); just as when everything that we call “destruction** 
lies in the separation of elements, it makes no sense to speak of the 
destruction of an element. 

