According to Lacan, it was none other than Karl Marx who invented the 
notion of symptom. Is this Lacanian thesis just a sally of wit, a vague 
analogy, or does it possess a pertinent theoretical foundation? if Marx 
really articulated the notion of the symptom as it is also at work in the 
Freudian field, then we must ask ourselves the Kantian question, concern- 
ing the epistemological ‘conditions of possibility’ of such an encounter: 
how was it possible for Marx, in his analysis of the world of commodities, 
to produce a notion which applies also to the analysis of dreams, hysterical 
phenomena, and so on? 

The answer is that there is a fundamental homology between the 
interpretative procedure of Marx and Freud - more precisely, between 
their analysis of commodity and of dreams. In both cases the point is to 
avoid the properly fetishistic fascination of the ‘content’ supposedly hidden 
behind the form: the ‘secret’ to be unveiled through analysis is not the 
content hidden by the form (the form of commodities, the form of dreams) 
but, on the contrary, the ‘secret’ of this form itself The theoretical intelligence 
of the form of dreams does not consist in penetrating from the manifest 
content to its ‘hidden kernel’, to the latent dream-thoughts; it consists in 
the answer to the question: why have the latent dream-thoughts assumed 
such a form, why were they transposed into the form of a dream? It is the 
same with commodities: the real problem is not to penetrate to the ‘hidden 



THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


kernel’ of the commodity - the determination of its value by the quantity 
of the work consumed in its production - but to explain why work assumed 
the form of the value of a commodity, why it can affirm its social character 
only in the commodity-form of its product. 

The notorious reproach of 'pansexualism’ addressed at the Freudian 
interpretation of dreams is already a commonplace. Hans-Jiirgen Eysenck, 
a severe critic of psychoanalysis, long ago observed a crucial paradox in 
the Freudian approach to dreams: according to Freud, the desire articulated 
in a dream is supposed to be - as a rule, at least - unconscious and at the 
same time of a sexual nature, which contradicts the majority of examples 
analysed by Freud himself starting with the dream he chose as an intro- 
ductory case to exemplify the logic of dreams, the famous dream of Irma’s 
injection. The latent thought articulated in this dream is Freud’s attempt 
to get rid of the responsibility for the failure of his treatment of Irma, a 
patient of his, by means of arguments of the type ‘it was not my fault, it 
was caused by a series of circumstances . . .’; but this ‘desire’, the meaning 
of the dream, is obviously, neither of a sexual nature (it rather concerns 
professional ethics) nor unconscious (the failure of Irma’s treatment was 
troubling Freud day and night ). 1 

This kind of reproach is based on a fundamental theoretical error: the 
identification of the unconscious desire at work in the dream with the 
'latent thought’ - that is, the signification of the dream. But as Freud 
continually emphasizes, there is nothing 'unconscious’ in the 'latent dream- 
thought’-. this thought is an entirely ‘normal’ thought which can be artic- 
ulated in the syntax of everyday, common language; topologically, it 
belongs to the system of ‘consciousness/preconsciousness’; the subject is 
usually aware of it, even excessively so; it harasses him all the time . . . 
Under certain conditions this thought is pushed away, forced out of the 
consciousness, drawn into the unconscious - that is, submitted to the laws 
of the ‘primary process’, translated into the ‘language of the unconscious’. 
The relationship between the 'latent thought’ and what is called the 

i Hans Jurgen Eysenck, Sense and Nonsense in Psychology, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 
1 966. 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM' 


‘manifest content’ of a dream - the text of the dream, the dream in its 
literal phenomenality - is therefore that between some entirely ‘normal’, 
(pre)conscious thought and its translation into the ‘rebus’ of the dream. 
The essential constitution of dream is thus not its 'latent thought’ but 
this work (the mechanisms of displacement and condensation, the figu- 
ration of the contents of words or syllables) which confers on it the form 
of a dream. 

Herein, then, lies the basic misunderstanding: if we seek the ‘secret of 
the dream’ in the latent content hidden by the manifest text, we are 
doomed to disappointment: all we find is some entirely ‘normal’ - albeit 
usually unpleasant - thought, the nature of which is mostly non-sexual 
and definitely not ‘unconscious’. This ‘normal’, conscious/prcconscious 
thought is not drawn towards the unconscious, repressed simply because 
of its ‘disagreeable’ character for the conscious, but because it achieves a 
kind of 'short circuit’ between it and another desire which is already 
repressed, located in the unconscious, a desire which has nothing whatsoever 
to do with the ‘latent dream-thought’. ‘A normal train of thought’ - normal 
and therefore one which can be articulated in common, everyday language: 
that is, in the syntax of the ‘secondary process’ - ‘is only submitted to the 
abnormal psychical treatment of the sort we have been describing’ - to 
the dream-work, to the mechanisms of the ‘primary process’ - ‘if an 
unconscious wish, derived from infancy and in a state of repression, has 
been transferred on to it’.' 

It is this unconscious/sexual desire which cannot be reduced to a 'normal 
train of thought’ because it is, from the very beginning, constitutively 
repressed (Freud’s Urverdrangung) - because it has no ‘original’ in the 
‘normal’ language of everyday communication, in the syntax of the 
conscious/preconscious; its only place is in the mechanisms of the ‘primary 
process’. This is why we should not reduce the interpretation of dreams, 
or symptoms in general, to the retranslation of the ‘latent dream-thought’ 
into the ‘normal’, everyday common language of inter-subjective 


2 Sigmund Freud, T he Interpretation of Dream, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1977. 



6 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


communication (Habermas’s formula). The structure is always triple; there 
are always three elements at work: the manifest dream-text, the latent dream- 
content or thought and the unconscious desire articulated in a dream. This 
desire attaches itself to the dream, it intercalates itself in the interspace 
between the latent thought and the manifest text; it is therefore not ‘more 
concealed, deeper’ in relation to the latent thought, it is decidedly more 
‘on the surface’, consisting entirely of the signifier’s mechanisms, of the 
treatment to which the latent thought is submitted. In other words, its 
only place is in the form of the ‘dream’: the real subject matter of the 
dream (the unconscious desire) articulates itself in the dream-work, in 
the elaboration of its ‘latent content’. 

As is often the case with Freud, what he formulates as an empirical 
observation (although of'quite surprising frequency’) announces a funda- 
mental, universal principle: ‘The form of a dream or the form in which it 
is dreamt is used with quite surprising frequency for representing its 
concealed subject matter’. I * 3 This, then, is the basic paradox of the dream: 
the unconscious desire, that which is supposedly its most hidden kernel, 
articulates itself precisely through the dissimulation work of the ‘kernel’ 
of a dream, its latent thought, through the work of disguising this 
content-kernel by means of its translation into the dream-rebus. Again, 
as characteristically, Freud gave this paradox its final formulation in a 
footnote added in a later edition: 

I used at one time to find it extraordinarily difficult to accustom readers 

to the distinction between the manifest content of dreams and the 
latent dream-thoughts. Again and again arguments and objections 

would be brought up based upon some uninterpreted dream in the 
form in which it had been retained in the memory, and the need to 
interpret it would be ignored. But now that analysts at least have 
become reconciled to replacing the manifest dream by the meaning 
revealed by its interpretation, many of them have become guilty of 


3 Ibid., p. 446. 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM' 


7 


falling into another confusion which they cling to with an equal 
obstinacy. They seek to find the essence ofdreams in their latent content 
and in so doing they overlook the distinction between the latentdream- 
thoughts and the dream-work. 

At bottom, dreams are nothing other than a particular form of 
thinking, made possible by the conditions of the state of sleep. It is the 
dream-work which creates that form, and it alone is the essence of 
dreaming - the explanation of its peculiar nature . 4 

Freud proceeds here in two stages: 

• First, we must break the appearance according to which a dream is 
nothing but a simple and meaningless confusion, a disorder caused 
by physiological processes and as such having nothing whatsoever 
to do with signification. In other words, we must accomplish a 
crucial step towards a hermeneutical approach and conceive the 
dream as a meaningful phenomenon, as something transmitting a 
repressed message which has to be discovered by an interpretative 
procedure; 

• Then we must get rid of the fascination in this kernel ofsignification, 
in the 'hidden meaning’ of the dream - that is to say, in the content 
concealed behind the form of a dream - and centre our attention 
on this form itself on the dream-work to which the 'latent dream- 
thoughts’ were submitted. 

The crucial thing to note here is that we find exactly the same articulation 
in two stages with Marx, in his analysis of the ‘secret of the commodity- 
form’: 


• First, we must break the appearance according to which the value 
of a commodity depends on pure hazard - on an accidental interplay 


4 Ibid., p. 650. 



8 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 

between supply and demand, for example. We must accomplish the 
crucial step of conceiving the hidden ‘meaning’ behind the 
commodity-form, the signification ‘expressed’ by this form; we 
must penetrate the ‘secret’ of the value of commodities: 

The determination of the magnitude of value by labour-time 
is therefore a secret, hidden under the apparent fluctuations 
in the relative values of commodities. Its discovery, while 
removing all appearance of mere accidentality from the 
determination of the magnitude of the values of products, 
yet in no way alters the mode in which that determination 
takes place . 5 

• But as Marx points out, there is a certain ‘yet’: the unmasking of 
the secret is not sufficient. Classical bourgeois political economy 
has already discovered the ‘secret’ of the commodity-form; its limit 
is that it is not able to disengage itself from this fascination in 
the secret hidden behind the commodity-form - that its attention 
is captivated by labour as the true source of wealth. In other words, 
classical political economy is interested only in contents concealed 
behind the commodity-form, which is why it cannot explain the 
true secret, not the secret behind the form but the secret of this 
form itself In spite of its quite correct explanation of the ‘secret 
of the magnitude of value’, the commodity remains for classical 
political economy a mysterious, enigmatic thing - it is the same 
as with the dream: even after we have explained its hidden 
meaning, its latent thought, the dream remains an enigmatic 
phenomenon; what is not yet explained is simply its form, the 
process by means of which the hidden meaning disguised itself 
in such a form. 


5 Karl Marx, Capital, Volume 1, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1976, p. 168. 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM! 


We must, then, accomplish another crucial step and analyse the genesis 
of the commodity-form itself It is not sufficient to reduce the form to the 
essence, to the hidden kernel, we must also examine the process - homol- 
ogous to the ‘dream-work’ - by means of which the concealed content 
assumes such a form, because, as Marx points out: 'Whence, then, arises 
the enigmatical character of the product of labour, as soon as it assumes 
the form of commodities? Clearly from this form itself ’. 6 7 It is this step 
towards the genesis of the form that classical political economy cannot 
accomplish, and this is its crucial weakness: 

Political economy has indeed analysed value and its magnitude, 
however incompletely, and has uncovered the content concealed within 
these forms. But it has never once asked the question why this content 
has assumed that particular form, that is to say, why labour is expressed 
in value, and why the measurement of labour by its duration is 
expressed in the magnitude of the value of the product/ 


The unconscious of the commodity-form 

Why did the Marxian analysis of the commodity-form - which, prima facie, 
concerns a purely economic question - exert such an influence in the 
general field of social sciences; why has it fascinated generations of philoso- 
phers, sociologists, art historians, and others? Because it offers a kind of 
matrix enabling us to generate all other forms of the ‘fetishistic inversion’: 
it is as if the dialectics of the commodity-form presents us with a pure - 
distilled, so to speak - version of a mechanism offering us a key to the 
theoretical understanding of phenomena which, at first sight, have nothing 
whatsoever to do with the field of political economy (law, religion, and so 
on]. In the commodity-form there is definitely more at stake than the 
commodity-form itself, and it was precisely this ‘more’ which exerted such 

6 Ibid., p. 7 6. 

7 Alfred Sohn Rethel, Intellectual and Manual Labour, London: Macmillan, 1978, p. 3 1. 



10 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


a fascinating power of attraction. The theoretician who has gone furthest 
in unfolding the universal reach of the commodity-form is indubitably 
Alf red Sohn-Rethel, one of the ‘fellow-travellers’ of the Frankfurt School. 
His fundamental thesis was that 

the formal analysis of the commodity holds the key not only to the 
critique of political economy, but also to the historical explanation of 
the abstract conceptual mode of thinking and of the division of intel- 
lectual and manual labour which came into existence with it . 8 

In other words, in the structure of the commodity-form it is possible to 
find the transcendental subject: the commodity-form articulates in 
advance the anatomy, the skeleton of the Kantian transcendental subject 
- that is, the network of transcendental categories which constitute the a 
priori frame of ‘objective’ scientific knowledge. Herein lies the paradox of 
the commodity-form: it - this inner-worldly, ‘pathological’ (in the Kantian 
meaning of the word) phenomenon - offers us a key to solving the funda- 
mental question of the theory of knowledge: objective knowledge with 
universal validity - how is this possible? 

After a series of detailed analyses, Sohn-Rethel came to the following 
conclusion: the apparatus of categories presupposed, implied by the scien- 
tific procedure (that, of course, of the Newtonian science of nature), the 
network of notions by means of which it seizes nature, is already present 
in the social effectivity, already at work in the act of commodity exchange. 
Before thought could arrive at pure abstraction, the abstraction was already 
at work in the social effectivity of the market. The exchange of commodities 
implies a double abstraction: the abstraction from the changeable character 
of the commodity during the act of exchange and the abstraction from 
the concrete, empirical, sensual, particular character of the commodity (in 
the act of exchange, the distinct, particular qualitative determination of 
a commodity is not taken into account; a commodity is reduced to an 


8 Ibid., p. 33 . 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM? 


abstract entity which - irrespective of its particular nature, of its ‘use- 
value’ - possesses ‘the same value’ as another commodity for which it is 
being exchanged]. 

Before thought could arrive at . the idea of a purely quantitative 
determination, a sine qua non of the modern science of nature, pure quantity 
was already at work in money, that commodity which renders possible 
the commensutability of the value of all other commodities notwithstand- 
ing their particular qualitative determination. Before physics could artic- 
ulate the notion of a purely abstract movement going on in a geometric 
space, independently of all qualitative determinations of the moving 
objects, the social act of exchange had already realized such a ‘pure’, abstract 
movement which leaves totally intact the concrete-sensual properties of 
the object caught in movement: the transference of property. And Sohn- 
Rethel demonstrated the same about the relationship of substance and 
its accidents, about the notion of causality operative in Newtonian science 

- in short, about the whole network of categories of pure reason. 

In this way, the transcendental subject, the support of the net of a 
priori categories, is confronted with the disquieting fact that it depends, 
in its very formal genesis, on some inner-worldly, ‘pathological’ process 

- a scandal, a nonsensical impossibility from the transcendental point of 
view, in so far as the formal-transcendental a priori is by definition 
independent of all positive contents: a scandal corresponding perfectly to 
the ‘scandalous’ character of the Freudian unconscious, which is also 
unbearable from the transcendental-philosophical perspective. That is to 
say, if we look closely at the ontological status of what Sohn-Rethel calls 
the ‘real abstraction’ [ das reale Absti'aktwn] (that is, the act of abstraction 
at work in the very effective process of the exchange of commodities], the 
homology between its status and that of the unconscious, this signifying 
chain which persists on ‘another Scene’, is striking: the 'real abstraction' is 
the unconscious of the transcendental subject, the support of objective-universal 
scientific knowledge. 

On the one hand, the ‘real abstraction’ is of course not ‘real’ in the 
sense of the real, effective properties of commodities as material objects: 



12 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 

the object-commodity does not contain ‘value’ in the same way as it 
possesses a set ofparticular properties determining its ‘use-value’ (its form, 
colour, taste, and so on]. As Sohn-Rethel pointed out, its nature is that of 
a postulate implied by the effective act of exchange - in other words, that 
of a certain 'as if [alsob\: during the act of exchange, individuals proceed 
as if the commodity is not submitted to physical, material exchanges; as 
if it is excluded from the natural cycle of generation and corruption; 
although on the level of their ‘consciousness’ they ‘know very well’ that 
this is not the case. 

The easiest way to detect the effectivity of this postulate is to think of 
the way we behave towards the materiality of money: we know very well 
that money, like all other material objects, suffers the effects of use, that 
its material body changes through time, but in the social effectivity of the 
market we none the less treat coins as if they consist ‘of an immutable 
substance, a substance over which time has no power, and which stands 
in antithetic contrast to any matter found in nature ’. 5 How tempting to 
recall here the formula of fetishistic disavowal: ‘I know very well, but 
still . . . ’. To the current exemplifications of this formula (T know that 
Mother has not got a phallus, but still ... [I believe she has got one]’; ‘I 
know that Jews are people like us, but still . . . [there is something in 
them]’] we must undoubtedly add also the variant of money: ‘I know 
that money is a material object like others, but still ... [it is as ifit were 
made of a special substance over which time has no power]’. 

Here we have touched a problem unsolved by Marx, that of the material 
character of money: not of the empirical, material stuff money is made 
of, but of the juWimf material, of that other ‘indestructible and immutable’ 
body which persists beyond the corruption of the body physical - this 
o ther body of money is like the corpse of the Sadeian victim which endures 
all torments and survives with its beauty immaculate. This immaterial 
corporality of the ‘body within the body’ gives us a precise definition of 
the sublime object, and it is in this sense only that the psychoanalytic 


9 Ibid., p. 59. 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM' 


13 


notion of money as a 'pre-phallic’, ‘anal’ object is acceptable - provided 
that we do not forget how this postulated existence of the sublime body 
depends on the symbolic order: the indestructible ‘body-within-the-body’ 
exempted from the effects of wear and tear is always sustained by the 
guarantee of some symbolic authority: 

A coin has it stamped upon its body that it is to serve as a means of 
exchange and not as an object of use. Its weight and metallic purity are 
guaranteed by the issuing authority so that, if by the wear and tear of 
circulation it has lost in weight, full replacement is provided. Its physical 
matter has visibly become a mere carrier of its social function . 10 

If, then, the ‘real abstraction’ has nothing to do with the level of ‘reality’, 
of the effective properties, of an object, it would be wrong for that reason 
to conceive of it as a ‘thought-abstraction’, as a process taking place in the 
‘interior’ of the thinking subject: in relation to this ‘interior’, the abstrac- 
tion appertaining to the act of exchange is in an irreducible way external, 
decentred - or, to quote Sohn-Rethel’s concise formulation: ‘The exchange 
abstraction is not thought, but it has the form of thought.’ 

Here we have one of the possible definitions of the unconscious: the 
fonn of thought whose ontological status is not that of thought, that is to say, 
the form of thought external to the thought itself- in short, some Other 
Scene external to the thought whereby the form of the thought is already 
articulated in advance. The symbolic order is precisely such a formal order 
which supplements and/or disrupts the dual relationship of ‘external’ 
factual reality and ‘internal’ subjective experience; Sohn-Rethel is thus 
quite justified in his criticism of Althusser, who conceives abstraction as 
a process taking place entirely in the domain of knowledge and refuses 
for that reason the category of ‘real abstraction’ as the expression of an 
‘epistemological confusion’. The ‘teal abstraction’ is unthinkable in the 
frame of the fundamental Althusserian epistemological distinction 


10 Ibid., p. 59. 



14 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


between the ‘real object’ and the ‘object of knowledge’ in so far as it intro- 
duces a third element which subverts the very field of this distinction: 
the form of the thought previous and external to the thought - in short: 
the symbolic order. 

We are now able to formulate precisely the ‘scandalous’ nature of 
Sohn-Rethel’s undertaking for philosophical reflection: he has confronted 
the closed circle of philosophical reflection with an external place where 
its form is already ‘staged’. Philosophical reflection is thus subjected to 
an uncanny experience similar to the one summarized by the old oriental 
formula ‘thou art that’: there, in the external effectivity of the exchange 
process, is your proper place; there is the theatre in which your truth was 
performed before you took cognizance of it. The confrontation with this 
place is unbearable because philosophy as such is defined by its blindness 
to this place: it cannot take it into consideration without dissolving itself, 
without losing its consistency. 

Thisdoesnot mean, on the other hand, that everyday ‘practical’ conscious- 
ness, as opposed to the philosophical-theoretical one - the consciousness of 
the individuals partaking in the act of exchange - is not also subjected to a 
complementary blindness. During the act of exchange, individuals proceed 
as ‘practical solipsists’, they misrecognize the socio-synthetic function of 
exchange: that is the level of the ‘real abstraction’ as the form of socialization 
of private production through the medium of the market: ‘What the 
commodity owners do in an exchange relation is practical solipsism - irre- 
spective of what they think and say about it ’. 11 Such a misrecognition is the 
sine qua non of the effectuation of an act of exchange - if the participants 
were to take note of the dimension of'real abstraction’, the ‘effective’ act of 
exchange itself would no longer be possible: 

Thus, in speaking of the abstractness of exchange we must be careful 

not to apply the term to the consciousness of the exchange agents. 

They are supposed to be occupied with the use of the commodities they 


11 Ibid., p. 42. 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM? 


15 


see, but occupied in their imagination only. 1 1 is the action o f exchange, 
and the action alone, that is abstract . . . the abstractness of that action 
cannot be noted when it happens because the consciousness of its 
agents is taken up with their business and with the empirical appear- 
ance of things which pertain to their use. One could say that the 
abstractness of their action is beyond realization by the actors because 
their very consciousness stands in the way. Were the abstractness to 
catch their minds their action would cease to be exchange and the 
abstraction would not arise. 12 

This misrecognition brings about the fissure of the consciousness into 
‘practical’ and ‘theoretical’: the proprietor partaking in the act of exchange 
proceeds as a ‘practical solipsist’: he overlooks the universal, socio-synthetic 
dimension of his act, reducing it to a casual encounter of atomized indi- 
viduals in the market. This ‘repressed’ social dimension of his act emerges 
thereupon in the form of its contrary - as universal Reason turned towards 
the observation of nature (the network of categories of ‘pure reason’ as 
the conceptual frame of natural sciences). 

The crucial paradox of this relationship between the social effectivity 
of the commodity exchange and the ‘consciousness’ of it is that - to use 
again a concise formulation by Sohn-Rethel - ‘this non-knowledge of the 
reality is part of its very essence’: the social effectivity of the exchange 
process is a kind of reality which is possible only on condition that the 
individuals partaking in it are not aware of its proper logic; that is, a kind 
of reality whose very ontological consistency implies a certain non-knowledge of 
its participants - if we come to ‘know too much’, to pierce the true 
functioning of social reality, this reality would dissolve itself 

This is probably the fundamental dimension of ‘ideology’: ideology is 
not simply a ‘false consciousness’, an illusory representation of reality, it 
is rather this reality itself which is already to be conceived as ‘ideological’ 

- 'ideological' is a social realiy whose very existence implies the non-knowledge of 


n Ibid., pp. 2 6 7. 



16 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


its participants as to its essence - that is, the social effectivity, the very repro- 
duction of which implies that the individuals ‘do not know what they are 
doing’, ‘ideological’ is not the ‘false consciousness’ of a (social) being but this being 
itself in so far as it is supported by false consciousness’. Thus we have finally 
reached the dimension of the symptom, because one of its possible defi- 
nitions would also be ‘a formation whose very consistency implies a certain 
non-knowledge on the part of the subject’: the subject can ‘enjoy his 
symptom’ only in so far as its logic escapes him - the measure of the 
success of its interpretation is precisely its dissolution. 


The social symptom 

How, then, can we define the Marxian symptom? Marx ‘invented the 
symptom’ (Lacan) by means of detecting a certain fissure, an asymmetry, 
a certain ‘pathological’ imbalance which belies the universalism of the 
bourgeois ‘rights and duties’. This imbalance, far from announcing the 
‘imperfect realization’ of these universal principles - that is, an insuffi- 
ciency to be abolished by further development - functions as their consti- 
tutive moment: the ‘symptom’ is, strictly speaking, a particular element 
which subverts its own universal foundation, a species subverting its 
own genus. In this sense, we can say that the elementary Marxian 
procedure of ‘criticism of ideology’ is already ‘symptomatic’: it consists 
in detecting a point of breakdown heterogenous to a given ideological field 
and at the same time necessary for that field to achieve its closure, its 
accomplished form. 

This procedure thus implies a certain logic ofexception: every ideolog- 
ical Universal - for example freedom, equality - is ‘false’ in so far as it 
necessarily includes a specific case which breaks its unity, lays open its 
falsity. Freedom, for example: a universal notion comprising a number of 
species (freedom of speech and press, freedom of consciousness, freedom 
of commerce, political freedom, and so on) but also, by means of a structural 
necessity, a specific freedom (that of the worker to sell freely his own labour 
on the market) which subverts this universal notion. That is to say, this 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM! 


17 


freedom is the very opposite of effective freedom: by selling his labour 
'freely’, the worker loses his freedom - the real content of this free act of 
sale is the worker's enslavement to capital. The crucial point is, of course, 
that it is precisely this paradoxical freedom, the form ofits opposite, which 
closes the circle of ‘bourgeois freedoms'. 

The same can also be shown for fair, equivalent exchange, this ideal 
of the market. When, in pre-capitalist society, the production of 
commodities has not yet attained universal character - that is, when it 
is still so-called 'natural production’ which predominates - the propri- 
etors of the means of production are still themselves producers [as a 
rule, at least): it is artisan production; the proptietors themselves work 
and sell their products on the market. At this stage of development there 
is no exploitation (in principle, at least - that is, if we do not consider 
the exploitation of apprentices, and so on); the exchange on the market 
is equivalent, every commodity is paid its full value. But as soon as 
production for the market prevails in the economic edifice of a given 
society, this generalization is necessarily accompanied by the appearance 
of a new, paradoxical type of commodity: the labour force, the workers 
who are not themselves proprietors of the means of production and who 
are consequently obliged to sell on the market their own labour instead 
of the products of their labour. 

With this new commodity, the equivalent exchange becomes its own 
negation - the very form of exploitation, of appropriation of the surplus- 
value. The crucial point not to be missed here is that this negation is 
strictly internal to equivalent exchange, not its simple violation: the labour 
force is not ‘exploited’ in the sense that its full value is not remunerated; 
in principle at least, the exchange between labour and capital is wholly 
equivalent and equitable. The catch is that the labour force is a peculiar 
commodity, the use of which - labour itself- produces a certain surplus- 
value, and it is this surplus over the value of the labour force itself which 
is appropriated by the capitalist. 

We have here again a certain ideological Universal, that of equivalent 
and equitable exchange, and a particular paradoxical exchange - that of 



18 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


the labour force for its wages - which, precisely as an equivalent, functions 
as the very form of exploitation. The ‘quantitative’ development itself, the 
universalization of the production of commodities, brings about a new 
‘quality’, the emergence of a new commodity representing the internal 
negation of the universal principle of equivalent exchange of commodities; 
in other words, it brings about a symptom. And in the Marxian perspective, 
utopian socialism consists in the very belief that a society is possible in 
which the relations of exchange are universalized and production for the 
market predominates, but workers themselves none the less remain 
proprietors of their means of production and are therefore not exploited 
- in short, ‘utopian’ conveys a belief in the possibility of a universality 
without its symptom, without the point of exception functioning as its inter- 
nal negation. 

This is also the logic of the Marxian critique of Hegel, of the Hegelian 
notion of society as a rational totality: as soon as we try to conceive the 
existing social order as a rational totality, we must include in it a para- 
doxical element which, without ceasing to be its internal constituent, 
functions as its symptom - subverts the very universal rational principle 
of this totality. For Marx, this ‘irrational’ element of the existing society 
was, of course, the proletariat, ‘the unreason of reason itself (Marx), the 
point at which the Reason embodied in the existing social order encounters 
its own unreason. 


Commodity fetishism 

In his attribution of the discovery of the symptom to Marx, Lacan is, 
however, more distinct: he locates this discovery in the way Marx conceived 
the passage from feudalism to capitalism: ‘One has to look for the origins 
of the notion of symptom not in Hippocrates but in Marx, in the connection 
he was first to establish between capitalism and what? - the good old 
times, what we call the feudal times .’ 13 To grasp the logic of this passage 


13 Jacques Lacan, ‘RSI’, Omicar?4, p. 106. 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM? 


19 


from feudalism to capitalism we have first to elucidate its theoretical back- 
ground, the Marxian notion of commodity fetishism. 

In a first approach, commodity fetishism is ‘a definite social relation 
between men, that assumes, in their eyes, the fantastic form of a relation 
between things’.' 4 The value of a certain commodity, which is effectively 
an insignia of a network of social relations between producers of diverse 
commodities, assumes the form of a quasi-‘natural’ property of another 
thing-commodity, money: we say that the value of a certain commodity 
is such-and-such amount of money. Consequently, the essential feature 
of commodity fetishism does not consist of the famous replacement of 
men with things (‘a relation between men assumes the form of a relation 
between things’); rather, it consists of a certain misrecognition which 
concerns the relation between a structured network and one ofits elements: 
what is really a structural effect, an effect of the network of relations 
between elements, appears as an immediate property of one of the 
elements, as if this property also belongs to it outside its relation with 
other elements. 

Such a misrecognition can take place in a ‘relation between things’ as 
well as in a ‘relation between men’ - Marx states this explicitly apropos 
of the simple form of the value-expression. The commodity A can express 
its value only by referring itself to another commodity, B, which thus 
becomes its equivalent: in the value relationship, the natural form of the 
commodity B (its use-value, its positive, empirical properties) functions 
as a form of value of the commodity A; in other words, the body of B 
becomes for A the mirror of its value. To these reflections, Marx added the 
following note: 

In a sort of way, it is with man as with commodities. Since he comes 
into the world neither with a looking-glass in his hand, nor as a Fichtian 
philosopher, to whom ‘I am I’ is sufficient, man first sees and recognizes 
himself in other men. Peter only establishes his own identity as a man 


14 Marx, Capital, Volume I, p. 77. 



20 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


by first comparing himself with Paul as being of like kind. And thereby 
Paul, just as he stands in his Pauline personality, becomes to Peter the 
type of the genus homo . 15 

This short note anticipates in a way the Lacanian theory of the mirror stage: 
only by being reflected in another man - that is, in so far as this other man 
offers it an image of its unity - can the ego arrive at its self identity; identity 
and alienation are thus strictly correlative. Marx pursues this homology: the 
other commodity (B) is an equivalent only in so far as A relates to it as to 
the form-of-appearance of its own value, only within this relationship. 
But the appearance - and herein lies the effect ofinversion proper to fetishism 
- the appearance is exactly opposite: A seems to relate to B as if, for B, to be 
an equivalent of A would not be a ‘reflexive determination’ (Marx) of A - that 
is as if B would already in itself be the equivalent of A; the property of ‘being- 
an-equivalent’ appears to belong to it even outside its relation to A, on the 
same level as its other ‘natural’ effective properties constituting its use-value. 
To these reflections, Marx again added a very interesting note: 

Such expressions of relations in general, called by Hegel reflex-categories, 
form a very curious class. For instance, one man is king only because 
other men stand in the relation of subjects to him. They, on the contrary, 
imagine that they are subjects because he is king . 16 

‘Being-a-king’ is an effect of the network of social relations between a 
‘king’ and his ‘subjects’; but - and here is the fetishistic misrecognition - 
to the participants of this social bond, the relationship appears necessarily 
in an inverse form: they think that they are subjects giving the king royal 
treatment because the king is already in himself, outside the relationship 
to his subjects, a king; as if the determination of ‘being-a-king’ were a 
‘natural’ property of the person of a king. How can one not remind oneself 

15 Ibid., p. 59. 

16 Ibid., p. 63. 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM? 21 


here of the famous Lacanian affirmation that a madman who believes 
himself to be a king is no more mad than a king who believes himself to 
be a king - who, that is, identifies immediately with the mandate ‘king’? 

What we have here is thus a parallel between two modes of fetishism, and 
the crucial question concerns the exact relationship between these two levels. 
That is to say, this relationship is by no means a simple homology: we cannot 
say that in societies in which production for the market predominates - 
ultimately, that is, in capitalist societies - ‘it is with man as with commodities’. 
Precisely the opposite is true: commodity fetishism occurs in capitalist 
societies, but in capitalism relations between men are definitely /zoffetishized’; 
what we have here are relations between ‘free’ people, each following his or 
her proper egoistic interest. The predominant and determining form of their 
interrelations is not domination and servitude but a contract between free 
people who are equal in the eyes of the law. Its model is the market exchange: 
here, two subjects meet, their relation is free of all the lumber of veneration 
of the Master, of the Master’s patronage and care for his subjects; they meet 
as two persons whose activity is thoroughly determined by their egoistic 
interest, every one of them proceeds as a good utilitarian; the other person is 
for him wholly delivered of all mystical aura; all he sees in his partner is 
another subject who follows his interest and interests him only in so far as 
he possesses something - a commodity - thatcouldsatisfy some ofhis needs. 

The two forms of fetishism are thus incompatible, in societies in which 
commodity fetishism reigns, the ‘relations between men’ are totally 
defetishized, while in societies in which there is fetishism in 'relations 
between men’ - in pre-capitalist societies - commodity fetishism is not 
yet developed, because it is ‘natural’ production, not production for the 
market, which predominates. This fetishism in relations between men 
has to be called by its proper name: what we have here are, as Marx points 
out, ‘relations of domination and servitude’ - that is to say, precisely the 
relation of Lordship and Bondage in a Hegelian sense ; 17 and it is as if the 

17 'Lordship’ and ‘bondage’ are the terms used in the translation we refer to (Hegel, 
Phenomenology of Spirit); following Kojeve, Lacan uses ‘maitre’ and ‘esclave’, which are then 
translated as ‘master’ and ‘slave’. 



22 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 

retreat of the Master in capitalism was only a displacement-, as if the de- 
fetishization in the ‘relations between men' was paid for by the emergence 
of fetishism in the 'relations between things’ - by commodity fetishism. 
The place of fetishism has just shifted from inter-subjective relations to 
relations ‘between things’: the crucial social relations, those of production, 
are no longer immediately transparent in the form of the interpersonal rela- 
tions of domination and servitude (of the Lord and his serfs, and so on]; they 
disguise themselves - to use Marx’s accurate formula - ‘under the shape of 
social relations between things, between the products of labour’. 

This is why one has to look for the discovery of the symptom in the 
way Marx conceived the passage from feudalism to capitalism. With the 
establishment of bourgeois society, the relations of domination and 
servitude are repressed: formally, we are apparently concerned with free 
subjects whose interpersonal relations are discharged of all fetishism; the 
repressed truth - that of the persistence of domination and servitude - 
emerges in a symptom which subverts the ideological appearance of 
equality, freedom, and so on. This symptom, the point of emergence of 
the truth about social relations, is precisely the 'social relations between 
things’ - in contrast to feudal society, where 

no matter what we may think of the parts played by the different 
classes of people themselves in this society, the social relations 
between individuals in the performance of their labour appear at all 
events as their own mutual personal relations, and are not disguised 
under the shape of social relations between things, between the 
products of labour . 18 

‘Instead of appearing at all events as their own mutual relations, the social 
relations between individuals are disguised under the shape of social 
relations between things’ - here we have a precise definition of the 
hysterical symptom, of the 'hysteria of conversion’ proper to capitalism. 


18 Marx, Capital, Volume I, p. 82. 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM' 23 


Totalitarian laughter 

Here Marx is more subversive than the majority of his contemporary 
critics who discard the dialectics of commodity fetishism as outdated: this 
dialectics can still help us to grasp the phenomenon of so-called 'totali- 
tarianism'. Let us take as our starting point Umberto Eco’s Name of the 
Rose, precisely because there is something wrong with this book. This crit- 
icism does not apply only to its ideology, which might be called - on the 
model oi spaghetti Wes terns - spaghetti structuralism: a kind ofsimplified, 
mass-culture version of structuralist and post-structuralist ideas [there is 
no final reality, we all live in a world of signs referring to other signs . . . ). 
What should bother us about this book is its basic underlying thesis: the 
source of totalitarianism is a dogmatic attachment to the official word: 
the lack of laughter, of ironic detachment. An excessive commitment to 
Goodmay initselfbecome the greatest Evil: real Evil is any kindoffanatical 
dogmatism, especially that exerted in the name of the supreme Good. 

This thesis is already part of the enlightened version of religious belief 
itself if we become too obsessed with the Good and with a corresponding 
hate for the secular, our obsession with Good may itself turn into a force 
of Evil, a form of destructive hatred for all that fails to correspond to our 
idea of Good. The real Evil is the supposedly innocent gaze which perceives 
in the world nothing but Evil, as in The Turn of the Screw by Henry James, 
in which the real Evil is, of course, the gaze of the storyteller (the young 
governess) herself. . . 

First, this idea of an obsession with (a fanatical devotion to) Good 
turning into Evil masks the inverse experience, which is much more 
disquieting: how an obsessive, fanatical attachment to Evil may in itself 
acquire the status of an ethical position, of a position which is not guided 
by our egoistical interests. Consider only Mozart’s Don Giovanni at the 
end of the opera, when he is confronted with the following choice: if he 
confesses his sins, he can still achieve salvation; if he persists, he will be 
damned for ever. From the viewpoint of the pleasure principle, the proper 
thing to do would be to renounce his past, but he does not, he persists in 



24 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


his Evil, although he knows that by persisting he will be damned for ever. 
Paradoxically, with his final choice of Evil, he acquires the status of an 
ethical hero - that is, of someone who is guided by fundamental principles 
‘beyond the pleasure principle’ and not just by the search for pleasure or 
material gain. 

What is really disturbing about The Name of the Rose, however, is the 
underlying belief in the liberating, anti-totalitarian force of laughter, of 
ironic distance. Our thesis here is almost the exact opposite of this under- 
lying premiss of Eco’s novel: in contemporary societies, democratic or 
totalitarian, that cynical distance, laughter, irony, are, so to speak, part of 
the game. The ruling ideology is not meant to be taken seriously or literally. 
Perhaps the greatest danger for totalitarianism is people who take its 
ideology literally - even in Eco’s novel, poor old Jorge, the incarnation of 
dogmatic belief who does not laugh, is rather a tragic figure: outdated, a 
kind of living dead, a remnant of the past, certainly not a person repre- 
senting the existing social and political powers. 

What conclusion should we draw from this? Should we say that we 
live in a post-ideological society? Perhaps it would be better, first, to try 
to specify what we mean by ideology. 


Cynicism as a fowl of ideology 

The most elementary definition of ideology is probably the well-known 
phrase from Marx’s Capital : ‘Sie wissen dasnicht, abersie tun es’ - ‘thejdonot 
know it, but they are doing it’. The very concept of ideology implies a kind 
of basic, constitutive naivete, the misrecognition of its own presuppositions, 
of its own effective conditions, a distance, a divergence between so-called 
social reality and our distorted representation, our false consciousness of 
it. That is why such a ‘naive consciousness’ can be submitted to a 
critical-ideological procedure. The aim of this procedure is to lead the 
naive ideological consciousness to a point at which it can recognize its 
own effective conditions, the social reality that it is distorting, and through 
this very act dissolve itself. In the more sophisticated versions of the critics 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM? 


of ideology - that developed by the Frankfurt School, for example - it is 
not just a question of seeing things (that is, social reality) as they ‘really 
are’, of throwing away the distorting spectacles of ideology; the main point 
is to see how the reality itself cannot reproduce itself without this so- 
called ideological mystification. The mask is not simply hiding the real 
state of things; the ideological distortion is written into its very essence. 

We find, then, the paradox of a being which can reproduce itself only 
in so far as it is misrecognized and overlooked: the moment we see it ‘as 
it really is’, this being dissolves itself into nothingness or, more precisely, 
it changes into another kind of reality. That is why we must avoid the 
simple metaphors of demasking, of throwing away the veils which are 
supposed to hide the naked reality. We can see why Lacan, in his seminar 
on The Ethic of Psychoanalysis, distances himself from the liberating gesture 
of saying finally that ‘the emperor has no clothes’. The point is, as Lacan 
puts it, that the emperor is naked only beneath his clothes, so if there is 
an unmasking gesture of psychoanalysis, it is closer to Alphonse Allais’s 
well-known joke, quoted by Lacan: somebody points at a woman and 
utters a horrified cry, ‘Look at her, what a shame, under her clothes, she 
is totally naked ’. 19 

But all this is already well known: it is the classic concept of ideology 
as ‘false consciousness’, misrecognition of the social reality which is part 
of this reality itself Our question is: Does this concept of ideology as a 
naive consciousness still apply to today’s world? Is it still operating today? 
In the Critique of Cynical Reason, a great bestseller in Germany, Peter 
Sloterdijk puts forward the thesis that ideology’s dominant mode of 
functioning is cynical, which renders impossible - or, more precisely, vain 
-the classic critical-ideological procedure. The cynical subject is quite aware 
of the distance between the ideological mask and the social reality, but 
he none the less still insists upon the mask. The formula, as proposed by 
Sloterdijk, would then be: ‘they know very well what they are doing, but 
still, they are doing it’. Cynical reason is no longer naive, but is a paradox 


19 Jacques Lacan, LeSeminaire VII L'ethique de la psychanalyse, Paris: Seuil, 1986, p. 231. 



26 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


of an enlightened false consciousness: one knows the falsehood very well, 
one is well aware of a particular interest hidden behind an ideological 
universality, but still one does not renounce it. 

We must distinguish this cynical position strictly from what Sloterdijk 
calls kymcism Kynicism represents the popular, plebeian rejection of the 
official culture by means of irony and sarcasm: the classical kynical proce- 
dure is to confront the pathetic phrases of the ruling official ideology - 
its solemn, grave tonality - with everyday banality and to hold them up 
to ridicule, thus exposing behind the sublime noblesse of the ideological 
phrases the egotistical interests, the violence, the brutal claims to power. 
This procedure, then, is more pragmatic than argumentative: it subverts 
the official proposition by confronting it with the situation of its enun- 
ciation; it proceeds ad hominem (for example when a politician preaches 
the duty of patriotic sacrifice, kynicism exposes the personal gain he is 
making from the sacrifice of others). 

Cynicism is the answer of the ruling culture to this kynical subversion: 
it recognizes, it takes into account, the particular interest behind the ideo- 
logical universality, the distance between the ideological mask and the 
reality, but it still finds reasons to retain the mask. This cynicism is not 
a direct position of immorality, it is more like morality itself put in the 
service of immorality - the model ofcynical wisdom is to conceive probity, 
integrity, as a supreme form of dishonesty, and morals as a supreme form 
of profligacy, the truth as the most effective form of a lie. This cynicism 
is therefore a kind of perverted ‘negation of the negation’ of the official 
ideology: confronted with illegal enrichment, with robbery, the cynical 
reaction consists in saying that legal enrichment is a lot more effective 
and, moreover, protected by the law. As Bertolt Brecht puts it in his 
Threepenny Opera: ‘what is the robbery of a bank compared to the founding 
of a new bank?’ 

It is clear, therefore, that confronted with such cynical reason, the 
traditional critique of ideology no longer works. We can no longer subject 
the ideological text to ‘symptomatic reading’, confronting it with its blank 
spots, with what it must repress to organize itself, to preserve its 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM' 27 


consistency - cynical reason takes this distance into account in advance. 
Is then the only issue left to us to affirm that, with the reign of cynical 
reason, we find ourselves in the so-called post-ideological world? Even 
Adorno came to this conclusion, starting from the premiss that ideology 
is, strictly speaking, only a system which makes a claim to the truth - 
that is, which is not simply a lie but a lie experienced as truth, a lie which 
pretends to be taken seriously. Totalitarian ideology no longer has this 
pretension. It is no longer meant, even by its authors, to be taken seriously 
- its status is just that of a means of manipulation, purely external and 
instrumental; its rule is secured not by its truth-value but by simple extra- 
ideological violence and promise of gain. 

It is here, at this point, that the distinction between symptom and fantasy 
must be introduced in order to show how the idea that we live in a post- 
ideological society proceeds a little too quickly: cynical reason, with all its 
ironic detachment, leaves untouched the fundamental level of ideological 
fantasy, the level on which ideology structures the social reality itself 


ideological fantasy 

If we want to grasp this dimension of fantasy, we must return to the 
Marxian formula ‘they do not know it, but they are doing it’, and pose 
ourselves a very simple question: where is the place of ideological illusion, 
in the ‘knowing or in the ‘doing in the reality itself? At first sight, the 
answer seems obvious: ideological illusion lies in the ‘knowing’. It is a 
matter of a discordance between what people are effectively doing and 
what they think they are doing - ideology consists in the very fact that 
the people ‘do not know what they are really doing’, that they have a false 
representation of the social reality to which they belong (the distortion 
produced, of course, by the same reality). Let us take again the classic 
Marxian example of so-called commodity fetishism: money is in reality 
just an embodiment, a condensation, a materialization of a network of 
social relations - the fact that it functions as a universal equivalent of all 
commodities is conditioned by its position in the texture ofsocial relations. 



28 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


But to the individuals themselves, this function of money - to be the 
embodiment of wealth - appears as an immediate, natural property of a 
thing called ‘money’, as if money is already in itself, in its immediate 
material reality, the embodiment of wealth. Here, we have touched upon 
the classic Marxist motive of ‘reification’: behind the things, the relation 
between things, we must detect the social relations, the relations between 
human subjects. 

But such a reading of the Marxian formula leaves out an illusion, an 
error, a distortion which is already at work in the social reality itself, at 
the level of what the individuals are doing, and not only what they think 
or know they ate doing. When individuals use money, they know very well 
that there is nothing magical about it - that money, in its materiality, is 
simply an expression ofsocial relations. The everyday spontaneous ideology 
reduces money to a simple sign giving the individual possessing it a right 
to a certain part of the social product. So, on an everyday level, the 
individuals know very well that there are relations between people behind 
the relations between things. The problem is that in their social activity 
itself, in what they are doing, they are acting as if money, in its material 
reality, is the immediate embodiment of wealth as such. They are fetishists 
in practice, not in theory. What they ‘do not know’, what they misrecognize, 
is the fact that in their social reality itself, in their social activity - in the 
act of commodity exchange - they are guided by the fetishistic illusion. 

To make this cleat, let us again take the classic Marxian motive of the 
speculative inversion of the relationship between the Universal and. the 
Particular. The Universal is just a property of particular objects which 
really exist, but when we are victims of commodity fetishism it appears 
as if the concrete content of a commodity (its use-value) is an expression 
of its abstract universality (its exchange-value) - the abstract Universal, 
the Value, appears as a teal Substance which successively incarnates itself 
in a series of concrete objects. That is the basic Marxian thesis: it is already 
the effective world of commodities which behaves like a Hegelian subject- 
substance, like a Universal going through a series of particular 
embodiments. Marx speaks about ‘commodity metaphysics’, about the 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM? 29 


‘religion of everyday life’. The roots of philosophical speculative idealism 
are in the social reality of the world of commodities; it is this world which 
behaves ‘idealistically’ - or, as Marx puts it in the first chapter of the first 
edition of Capital: 

This inversion through which what is sensible and concrete counts only 
as a phenomenal form of what is abstract and universal, contrary to 
the real state of things where the abstract and the universal count only 
as a property of the concrete - such an inversion is characteristic of the 
expression of value, and it is this inversion which, at the same time, 
makes the understanding ofthis expression so difficult. Ifl say: Roman 
law and German law are both laws, it is something which goes by 
itself But if, on the contrary, I say: the Law, this abstract thing, realizes 
itself in Roman law and in German law, i.e. in these concrete laws, the 
interconnection becomes mystical . 20 

The question to ask again is: where is the illusion here? We must not forget 
that the bourgeois individual, in his everyday ideology, is definitely not a 
speculative Hegelian: he does not conceive the particular content as resulting 
from an autonomous movement of the universal Idea. He is, on the contrary, 
a good Anglo-Saxon nominalist, thinking that the Universal is a property 
of the Particular - that is, of really existing things. Value in itself does not 
exist, there are just individual things which, among other properties, have 
value. The problem is that in his practice, in his real activity, he acts as if 
the particular things (the commodities) were just so many embodiments of 
universal Value. To rephrase Marx: He knows very well that Roman law and 
German law are just two kinds of law, but in his practice, he acts as if the Law itself, 
this abstract entity, realizes itself in Roman law and in German law. 

So now we have made a decisive step forward; we have established a 
new way to read the Marxian formula ‘they do not know it, but they are 
doing it’: the illusion is not on the side of knowledge, it is already on the 


20 Karl Marx, Les 'senders escarpes’ deKarl Marx, Volume I, Paris: CERE, 1977, p. 132. 



30 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 

side of reality itself, of what the people are doing. What they do not know 
is that their social reality itself, their activity, is guided by an illusion, by 
a fetishistic inversion. What they overlook, what they misrecognize, is not 
the reality but the illusion which is structuring their reality, their real 
social activity. They know very well how things really are, but still they 
are doing it as if they did not know. The illusion is therefore double: it 
consists in overlooking the illusion which is structuring our real, effective 
relationship to reality. And this overlooked, unconscious illusion is what 
may be called the ideological fantasy. 

If our concept ofideology remains the classic one in which the illusion 
is located in knowledge, then today’s society must appear post-ideological: 
the prevailing ideology is that of cynicism; people no longer believe in 
ideological truth; they do not take ideological propositions seriously. The 
fundamental level ofideology, however, is not that of an illusion masking 
the real state of things but that of an (unconscious) fantasy structuring 
our social reality itself And at this level, we are of course far from being 
a post- ideological society. Cynical distance is just one way - one of many 
ways - to blind ourselves to the structuring power of ideological fantasy: 
even if we do not take things seriously, even if we keep an ironical distance, 
we are still doing them. 

It is from this standpoint that we can account for the formula of 
cynical reason proposed by Sloterdijk: 'they know very well what they 
are doing, but still, they are doing it’. If the illusion were on the side of 
knowledge, then the cynical position would really be a post-ideological 
position, simply a position without illusions: ‘they know what they are 
doing, and they are doing it’. But if the place of the illusion is in the 
reality of doing itself, then this formula can be read in quite another 
way: ‘they know that, in their activity, they are following an illusion, 
but still, they are doing it’. For example, they know that their idea of 
Freedom is masking a particular form of exploitation, but they still 
continue to follow this idea of Freedom. 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM! 31 


T he objectivity of belief 

From this standpoint, it would also be worth rereading the elementary 
Marxian formulation of so-called commodity fetishism: in a society in 
which the products of human labour acquire the form of commodities, 
the crucial relations between people take on the form of relations between 
things, between commodities - instead of immediate relations between 
people, we have social relations between things. In the 1960s and 1970s, 
this whole problem was discredited through Althusserian anti-humanism. 
The principal reproach of the Althusserians was that the Marxian theory 
of commodity fetishism is based on a naive, ideological, epistemologically 
unfounded opposition between persons (human subjects) and things. But 
a Lacanian reading can give this formulation a new, unexpected twist: the 
subversive power of Marx's approach lies precisely in the way he uses the 
opposition of persons and things. 

In feudalism, as we have seen, relations between people are mystified, 
mediated through a web of ideological beliefs and superstitions. They are 
the relations between the master and his servant, whereby the master 
exerts his charismatic power of fascination, and so forth. Although in 
capitalism the subjects are emancipated, perceiving themselves as free from 
medieval religious superstitions, when they deal with one another they 
do so as rational utilitarians, guided only by their selfish interests. The 
point of Marx’s analysis, however, is that the things (commodities] themselves 
believe in their place, instead of the subjects: it is as if all their beliefs, super- 
stitions and metaphysical mystifications, supposedly surmounted by the 
rational, utilitarian personality, are embodied in the ‘social relations 
between things’. They no longer believe, but the things themselves believe for 
them. 

This seems also to be a basic Lacanian proposition, contrary to the usual 
thesis that a belief is something interior and knowledge something exterior 
(in the sense that it can be verified through an external procedure). Rather, 
it is belief which is radically exterior, embodied in the practical, effective 
procedure of people. It is similar to Tibetan prayer wheels: you write a 



32 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 

prayer on a paper, put the rolled paper into a wheel, and turn it automat- 
ically, without thinking (or, if you want to proceed according to the 
Hegelian 'cunning of reason’, you attach it to a windmill, so that it is 
moved around by the wind). In this way, the wheel itself is praying for 
me, instead of me - or, more precisely, I myself am praying through the 
medium of the wheel. The beauty of it all is that in my psychological infe- 
riority I can think about whatever I want, I can yield to the most dirty 
and obscene fantasies, and it does not matter because - to use a good old 
Stalinist expression - whatever I am thinking, objectively I am praying. 

This is how we should grasp the fundamental Lacanian proposition 
that psychoanalysis is not a psychology: the most intimate beliefs, even 
the most intimate emotions such as compassion, crying, sorrow, laughter, 
can be transferred, delegated to others without losing their sincerity. In 
his seminar on The Ethic of Psychoanalysis, Lacan speaks of the role of the 
Chorus in classical tragedy: we, the spectators, came to the theatre worried, 
full of everyday problems, unable to adjust without reserve to the problems 
of the play, that is to feel the required fears and compassions - but no 
problem, there is the Chorus, who feels the sorrow and the compassion 
instead of us - or, more precisely, we feel the required emotions through 
the medium of the Chorus: ‘You are then relieved of all worries, even if 
you do not feel anything, the Chorus will do so in your place ’. 21 

Even if we, the spectators, are just drowsily watching the show, 
objectively - to use again the old Stalinist expression - we are doing our 
duty of compassion for the heroes. In so-called primitive societies we find 
the same phenomenon in the form of'weepers’, women hired to cry instead 
of us: so, through the medium of the other, we accomplish our duty of 
mourning, while we can spend our time on more profitable exploits - 
disputing the division of the inheritance of the deceased, for example. 

But to avoid the impression that this exteriorization, this transference 
of our most intimate feeling, is simply a characteristic of the so-called 
primitive stages of development, let us remind ourselves of a phenomenon 


21 Lacan, Le Seminaire VII, p. 295. 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM? 33 


quite usual in popular television shows or serials: ‘canned laughter’. After 
some supposedly funny or witty remark, you can hear the laughter and 
applause included in the soundtrack of the show itself- here we have the 
exact counterpart of the Chorus in classical tragedy; it is here that we have 
to look for 'living Antiquity’. That is to say, why this laughter? The first 
possible answer - that it serves to remind us when to laugh - is interesting 
enough, because it implies the paradox that laughter is a matter of duty 
and not of some spontaneous feeling; but this answer is not sufficient 
because we do not usually laugh. The only correct answer would be that 
the Other - embodied in the television set - is relieving us even of our 
duty to laugh - is laughing instead of us. So even if tired from a hard 
day’s stupid work, all evening we did nothing but gaze drowsily into the 
television screen, we can say afterwards that objectively, through the 
medium of the other, we had a really good time. 

If we do not take into account this objective status of belief, we might 
finish like the fool from a well-known joke who thought he was a grain 
of corn. After some time in a mental hospital, he was finally cured: now 
he knew that he was not a grain but a man. So they let him out; but soon 
afterwards he came running back, saying: ‘I met a hen and I was afraid 
she would eat me.’ The doctors tried to calm him: ‘But what are you afraid 
of? Now you know that you are not a grain but a man.’ The fool answered: 
‘Yes, of course, I know that, but does the hen know that I am no longer a 
grain?’ 


‘Law is Law’ 

The lesson to be drawn from this concerning the social field is above all 
that belief far from being an ‘intimate’, purely mental state, is always 
matenalized'm our effective social activity: belief supports the fantasy which 
regulates social reality. Let us take the case of Kafka: it is usually said that 
in the ‘irrational’ universe of his novels, Kafka has given an ‘exaggerated’, 
‘fantastic’, ‘subjectively distorted’ expression to modern bureaucracy and 
the fate of the individual within it. In saying this we overlook the crucial 



34 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 

fact that it is this very ‘exaggeration’ which articulates the fantasy regu- 
lating the libidinal functioning of the ‘effective’, ‘real’ bureaucracy itself 
The so-called ‘Kafka’s universe’ is not a ‘fantasy-image of social reality’ 
but, on the contrary, the mise-en-scene of the fantasy which is at work in the 
midst of social realiy itself, we all know very well that bureaucracy is not 
all-powerful, but our ‘effective’ conduct in the presence of bureaucratic 
machinery is already regulated by a belief in its almightiness ... In contrast 
to the usual ‘criticism of ideology’ trying to deduce the ideological form 
of a determinate society from the conjunction of its effective social rela- 
tions, the analytical approach aims above all at the ideological fantasy 
efficient in social reality itself 

What we call ‘social reality’ is in the last resort an ethical construction; 
it is supported by a certain asifwe act as if we believe in the almightiness 
of bureaucracy, as if the President incarnates the Will of the People, as if 
the Party expresses the objective interest of the working class . . . ). As soon 
as the belief (which, let us remind ourselves again, is definitely not to be 
conceived at a ‘psychological’ level: it is embodied, materialized, in the 
effective functioning of the social field) is lost, the very texture of the social 
field disintegrates. This was already articulated by Pascal, one of Althusser’s 
principal points ofreference, in his attempt to develop the concept of'Ideo- 
logical State Apparatuses’. According to Pascal, the interiority of our reason- 
ing is determined by the external, nonsensical ‘machine’ - automatism of 
the signifier, of the symbolic network in which the subjects are caught: 

For we must make no mistake about ourselves: we are as much automa- 
ton as mind . . . Proofs only convince the mind; habit provides the 
strongest proofs and those that are most believed. It inclines the 
automaton, which leads the mind unconsciously along with it . 22 

Here Pascal produces the very Lacanian definition of the unconscious: ‘the 
automaton (i.e. the dead, senseless letter), which leads the mind 


22 Blaise Pascal, Pensrn, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1 966, p. 274. 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM? 


35 


unconsciously [sails le savoir\ with it’. It follows, from this constitudvely 
senseless character of the Law, that we must obey it not because it is just, 
good or even beneficial, but simply because it is the law - this tautology 
articulates the vicious circle of its authority, the fact that the last 
foundation of the Law’s authority lies in its process of enunciation: 

Custom is the whole of equity for the sole reason that it is accepted. 

That is the mystic basis of its authority. Anyone who tries to bring it 

back to its first principle destroys it. 2! 

The only real obedience, then, is an 'external’ one: obedience out of 
conviction is not real obedience because it is already ‘mediated’ through 
our subjectivity - that is, we are not really obeying the authority but 
simply following our j udgement, which tells us that the authority deserves 
to be obeyed in so far as it is good, wise, beneficent . . . Even more than 
for our relation to ‘external’ social authority, this inversion applies to our 
obedience to the internal authority of belief it was Kierkegaard who wrote 
that to believe in Christ because we consider him wise and good is a dread- 
ful blasphemy - it is, on the contrary, only the act of belief itself which 
can give us an insight into his goodness and wisdom. Certainly we must 
search for rational reasons which can substantiate our belief, our obedience 
to the religious command, but the crucial religious experience is that these 
reasons reveal themselves only to those who already believe - we find 
reasons attesting our belief because we already believe; we do not believe 
because we have found sufficient good reasons to believe. 

‘External’ obedience to the Law is thus not submission to external 
pressure, to so-called non-ideological ‘brute force’, but obedience to the 
Command in so far as it is ‘incomprehensible’, not understood; in so far 
as it retains a ‘traumatic’, ‘irrational’ character: far from hiding its full 
authority, this traumatic, non-integrated character of the Law is a positive 
condition of it. This is the fundamental feature of the psychoanalytic concept 


23 Ibid., p. 46. 



36 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


ofthe superego-, an injunction which is experienced as traumatic, ‘senseless’ 
- that is, which cannot be integrated into the symbolic universe of the 
subject. But for the Law to function ‘normally’, this traumatic fact that 
‘custom is the whole of equity for the sole reason that it is accepted’ - the 
dependence of the Law on its process of enunciation or, to use a concept 
developed by Laclau and Mouffe, its radically contingent character - must 
be repressed into the unconscious, through the ideological, imaginary 
experience of the ‘meaning’ of the Law, of its foundation in Justice, Truth 
(or, in a more modern way, functionality): 

It would therefore be a good thing for us to obey laws and customs 
because they are laws . . . But people are not amenable to this doctrine, 
and thus, believing that truth can be found and resides in laws and 
customs, they believe them and take their antiquity as a proof of their 
truth (and not just of their authority, without truth ). 24 

It is highly significant that we find exactly the same formulation in Kafka’s 
Trial, at the end of the conversation between K. and the priest: 

‘I do not agree with that point of view,’ said K., shaking his head, 'for 
if one accepts it, one must accept as true everything the door-keeper 
says. But you yourself have sufficiently proved how impossible it is to 
do that.’ ‘No,’ said the priest, ‘it is not necessary to accept everything 
as true, one must only accept it as necessary.’ ‘A melancholy conclusion,’ 
said K. ‘It turns lying into a universal principle .’ 25 

What is ‘repressed’ then, is not some obscure origin of the Law but the 
very fact that the Law is not to be accepted as true, only as necessary - the 
fact that its authority is without tinth. The necessary structural illusion which 
drives people to believe that truth can be found in laws describes precisely 

24 Ibid., p. 216. 

25 Franz Kafka, The Trial, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1985, p. 243. 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM! 37 


the mechanism o f transference transference is this supposition of a Truth, 
of a Meaning behind the stupid, traumatic, inconsistent fact of the Law. 
In other words, ‘transference’ names the vicious circle of belief: the reasons 
why we should believe are persuasive only to those who already believe. 
The crucial text of Pascal here is the famous Fragment 233 on the necessity 
of the wager; the first, largest part of it demonstrates at length why it is 
rationally sensible to ‘bet on God’, but this argument is invalidated by 
the following remark of Pascal’s imaginary partner in dialogue: 

my hands are tied and my lips are sealed; I am being forced to wager and 
I am not free; I am being held fast and I am so made that I cannot believe. 
What do you want me to do then? - ‘That is true, but at least get it into 
your head that, ifyou are unable to believe, it is because ofyour passions, 
since reason impels you to believe and yet you cannot do so. Concentrate 
then not on convincing yourself by multiplying proofs of God’s existence 
but by diminishing your passions. You want to find faith and you do 
not know the road. You want to be cured of unbelief and you ask for the 
remedy: learn from those who were once bound like you and who now 
wager all they have. These are people who know the road you wish to 
follow, who have been cured of the affliction of which you wish to be 
cured: follow the way by which they began. They behaved just as if they 
did believe, taking holy water, having masses said, and so on. That will 
make you believe quite naturally, and will make you more docile. 

‘Now what harm will come to you from choosing this course? You 
will be faithful, honest, humble, grateful, full of good works, a sincere, 
true friend ... It is true you will not enjoy noxious pleasures, glory 
and good living, but will you not have others? 

‘I tell you that you will gain even in this life, and that at every step 
you take along this road you will see that your gain is so certain and your 
risk so negligible that in the end you will realize, that you have wagered 
on something certain and infinite for which you have paid nothing.’ 24 


26 Pascal, Pensees, pp. 152 3. 



38 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


Pascal’s final answer, then, is: leave rational argumentation and submit 
yourself simply to ideological ritual, stupefy yourself by repeating the 
meaningless gestures, act as if you. already believe, and the belief will come 
by itself 

Far from being limited to Catholicism, such a procedure for obtaining 
ideological conversion has universal application, which is why, in a certain 
epoch, it was very popular among French Communists. The Marxist version 
of the theme of 'wager’ runs as follows: the bourgeois intellectual has his 
hands tied and his lips sealed. Apparently he is free, bound only to the 
argument of his reason, but in reality he is permeated by bourgeois 
prejudices. These prejudices do not let him go, so he cannot believe in the 
sense of history, in the historical mission of the working class. So what 
can he do? 

The answer: first, he should at least recognize his impotence, his inca- 
pacity to believe in the sense of history; even if his reason leans towards 
the truth, the passions and prejudices produced by his class position 
prevent him from accepting it. So he should not exert himselfwith proving 
the truth of the historical mission of the working class; rather, he should 
learn to subdue his petty-bourgeois passions and prejudices. Fie should 
take lessons from those who were once as impotent as he is now but are 
ready to risk all for the revolutionary Cause. Ffe should imitate the way 
they began: they behaved just as if they did believe in the mission of the 
working class, they became active in the Party, they collected money to 
help strikers, propagate the workers’ movement, and so on. This stupefied 
them and made them believe quite naturally. And really, what harm has 
come to them through choosing this course? They became faithful, full 
of good works, sincere and noble ... It is true that they had to renounce 
a few noxious petty-bourgeois pleasures, their egocentrist intellectualist 
trifling, their false sense of individual freedom, but on the other hand - 
and notwithstanding the factual truth of their belief- they gained a lot: 
they live a meaningful life, free of doubts and uncertainty; all their everyday 
activity is accompanied by the consciousness that they are making their 
small contribution to the great and noble Cause. 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM? 


What distinguishes this Pascalian ‘custom’ from insipid behaviourist 
wisdom (‘the content of your belief is conditioned by your factual behav- 
iour’) is the paradoxical status ofa belief before belief, by following a custom, 
the subject believes without knowing it, so that the final conversion is 
merely a formal act by means of which we recognize what we have already 
believed. In other words, what the behaviourist reading of Pascalian 
‘custom’ misses is the crucial fact that the external custom is always a 
material support for the subject’s unconscious. The main achievement of 
Marek Kaniewska’s film Another Country is to designate, in a sensitive and 
delicate way, this precarious status of ‘believing without knowing it' - 
precisely apropos of the conversion to Communism. 

Another Country is a film a clef about the relationship between two 
Cambridge students, the Communist Judd (real model: John Cornford, 
idol of the Oxford student left, who died in 1936 in Spain) and the rich 
homosexual Guy Bennett, who later becomes a Russian spy and tells the 
story in retrospect to an English journalist who visits him in his Moscow 
exile (real model: Guy Burgess, of course). There is no sexual relationship 
between them; Judd is the only one who is not sensitive to Guy’s charm 
(‘the exception to the Bennett rule’, as Guy puts it): precisely for that reason, 
he is the point of Guy’s transferential identification. 

The action occurs in the ‘public school’ environment of the thirties: 
the patriotic empty talk, the terror of the student-heads (gods’) over ordi- 
nary students; yet in all this terror there is something non-binding, not 
quite serious; it has the ring of an amusing travesty concealing a universe 
in which enjoyment actually reigns in all its obscenity, above all in the 
form of a ramified network of homosexual relations - the real terror is, 
rather, the unbearable pressure of enjoyment. It is for this reason that 
Oxford and Cambridge in the 1930s offered such a rich field for the KGB: 
not only because of the ‘guilt complex’ of rich students doing so well in 
the midst of the economic and social crisis, but above all because of this 
stuffy atmosphere of enjoyment, the very inertia of which creates an 
unbearable tension, a tension which could be dissolved only by a ‘totali- 
tarian’ appeal to renunciation of the enjoyment - in Germany, it was Hitler 



40 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


who knew how to occupy the place of this appeal; in England, at least 
among the elite students, the KGB hunters were best versed in it. 

The film is worth mentioning for the way it depicts Guy’s conversion: 
its delicacy is attested by the very fact that it does not depict it, that it only 
lays all the elements for it. That is to say, the flashback to the 1930s 
which occupies the main part of the film stops at the precise point at 
which Guy is already converted, although he does not yet know it - the 
film is delicate enough to leave out the formal act of conversion; it suspends 
the flashback in a situation homologous to one in which somebody is 
already in love but is not yet aware of it, and for this reason gives expression 
to his love in the form of an excessively cynical attitude and defensive 
agressivity towards the person with whom he is in love. 

What is, then, looking closer, the denouement of the film? Two reactions 
to this situation ofstuffy enjoyment are opposed: Judd’s renunciation, his 
openly declared Communism (it is for this reason that he couldn’t be a 
KGB agent], and on the other side Guy as a representative of the extreme, 
putrefied hedonism whose game, however, starts to fall apart (the ‘gods’ 
have humiliated him by a ritual beating because his personal enemy, a 
patriotic career seeker, has unmasked his homosexual relationship with 
a younger student: in this way, Guy lost a promised opportunity to become 
a ‘god’ himself the following year). At this point, Guy becomes aware of 
the fact that the key to the dissolution of his untenable situation lies in 
his transferential relationship to Judd: this is nicely indicated by two 
details. 

First, hereproaches Judd for not himself being liberated from bourgeois 
prejudices - in spite of all his talk about equality and fraternity, he still 
thinks that ‘some persons are better than others because of the way they 
make love’; in short, he catches the subject on whom he has a transference 
in his inconsistency, in his lack. Second, he reveals to the naive Judd the 
very mechanism of transference: Judd thinks that his belief in the truth 
of Communism results from his thorough study of history and the texts 
of Marx, to which Guy replies, 'You are not a Communist because you 
understand Marx, you understand Marx because you are a Communist!’ 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM? 


41 


- that is to say, Judd understands Marx because he presupposes in advance 
that Marx is the bearer of knowledge enabling access to the truth of history, 
like the Christian believer who does not believe in Christ because he has 
been convinced by theological arguments but, on the contrary, is suscep- 
tible to theological arguments because he is already illuminated by the 
grace of belief 

In a first, naive approach it could appear that because of these two 
features Guy is on the brink of liberating himself from his transference 
on Judd (he catches Judd in his inconsistency, and even unmasks the very 
mechanism of transference to boot), but the truth is none the less the 
opposite: these two features only confirm how ‘those in the know are lost’ 
[les non-dupes errent ], as Lacan would say. Precisely as one ‘in the know’, 
Guy is caught in transference - both reproaches ofjudd receive their mean- 
ing only against the background that his relationship with Judd is already 
a transferential one (as with the analysand who finds such pleasure in 
discovering small weaknesses and mistakes in the analyst precisely because 
the transference is already at work). 

Thestate in which Guy finds himselfimmediately before his conversion, 
this state of extreme tension, is best rendered by his own answer to J udd’s 
reproach that he is himself to blame for the mess he is in (if he had only 
proceeded with a little discretion and hidden his homosexuality instead 
of flaunting it in a provocative and defiant way, there would have been 
no unpleasant disclosure to ruin him): ‘What better cover for someone 
like me than total indiscretion?’ This is, of course, the very Lacanian defi- 
nition of deception in its specifically human dimension, where we deceive 
the Other by means of the truth itself in a universe in which all are 
looking for the true face beneath the mask, the best way to lead them 
astray is to wear the mask of truth itself But it is impossible to maintain 
the coincidence of mask and truth: far from gaining us a kind of 'immediate 
contact with our fellow-men’, this coincidence renders the situation 
unbearable; all communication is impossible because weare totally isolated 
through the very disclosure - the sine qua non of successful communication 
is a minimum of distance between appearance and its hidden rear. 



42 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


The only door open is thus escape into belief in the transcendent 
‘another country’ (Communism) and into conspiracy (becoming a KGB 
agent), which introduces a radical gap between the mask and the true face. 
So when, in the last scene of the flashback, Judd and Guy traverse the 
college courtyard, Guy is already a believer: his fate is sealed, even if he 
does not yet know it. His introductory words, ‘Wouldn’t it be wonderful 
if Communism were really true?’, reveal his belief, which is for the time 
b eing still delegated, transferred on to another - and so we can immediately 
pass on to the Moscow exile decades later where the only leftover of enjoy- 
ment binding the old and crippled Guy to his country is the memory of 
cricket. 


Kajka, critic of Althusser 

The externality of the symbolic machine (‘automaton’) is therefore not 
simply external: it is at the same time the place where the fate of our inter- 
nal, most ‘sincere’ and ‘intimate’ beliefs is in advance staged and decided. 
When we subject ourselves to the machine of a religious ritual, we already 
believe without knowing it; our belief is already materialized in the exter- 
nal ritual; in other words, we already believe unconsciously, because it is 
from this external character of the symbolic machine that we can explain 
the status of the unconscious as radically external - that of a dead letter. 
Belief is an affair of obedience to the dead, uncomprehended letter. It is 
this short-circuit between the intimate belief and the external ‘machine’ 
which is the most subversive kernel of Pascalian theology. 

Of course, in his theory of Ideological State Apparatuses, Althusser gave 
an elaborated, contemporary version of this Pascalian ‘machine ’; 27 but the 
weak point of his theory is that he or his school never succeeded in thinking 
out the link between Ideological State Apparatuses and ideological inter- 
pellation: how does the Ideological State Apparatus (the Pascalian 
‘machine’, the signifying automatism) ‘internalize’ itself; how does it 


27 Louis Althusser, Essays in Ideology, London: Verso, 1984. 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM! 43 


produce the effect of ideological belief in a Cause and the interconnecting 
effect of subjectivation, of recognition of one’s ideological position? The 
answer to this is, as we have seen, that this external ‘machine’ of State 
Apparatuses exercises its force only in so far as it is experienced, in the uncon- 
scious economy of the subject, as a traumatic, senseless injunction. Althusser 
speaks only of the process of ideological interpellation through which the 
symbolic machine of ideology is ‘internalized’ into the ideological experience 
ofMeaning and T ruth: but we can learn from Pascal that this ‘internalization’, 
by structural necessity, never fully succeeds, that there is always a residue, 
a leftover, a stain of traumatic irrationality and senselessness sticking to it, 
and that this leftover, far from hindering the Jull submission of the subject to the 
ideological command, is the very condition of it: it is precisely this non-in tegrated 
surplus of senseless traumatism which confers on the Law its unconditional 
authority: in other words, which - in so far as it escapes ideological sense - 
sustains what we might call the ideological jouis-sense, enjoyment-in-sense 
(enjoy-meant), proper to ideology. 

And again, it was no accident that we mentioned the name of Kafka: 
concerning this ideological jouis-sense we can say that Kafka develops a 
kind of criticism of Althusser avantla lettre, in letting us see that which 
is constitutive of the gap between ‘machine’ and its ‘internalization’. Is 
not Kafka’s ‘irrational’ bureaucracy, this blind, gigantic, nonsensical appa- 
ratus, precisely the Ideological State Apparatus with which a subject is 
confronted before any identification, any recognition - any subjectivation - 
takes place? What, then, can we learn from Kafka? 

In a first approach, the starting point in Kafka’s novels is that of an 
interpellation: the Kafkaesque subject is interpellated by a mysterious 
bureaucratic entity (Law, Castle). But this interpellation has a somewhat 
strange look: it is, so to say, an interpellation without identification/ 
subjectivation; it does not offer us a Cause with which to identify - the 
Kafkaesque subject is the subject desperately seeking a trait with which 
to identify, he does not understand the meaning of the call of the Other. 

This is the dimension overlooked in the Althusserian account of 
interpellation: before being caught in the identification, in the symbolic 



44 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


recognition/misrecognition, the sub ject (?) is trapped by theOther through 
a paradoxical object-cause of desire in the midst of it [a], through this 
secret supposed to be hidden in the Other: $0a - the Lacanian formula of 
fantasy. What does it mean, more precisely, to say that ideological fantasy 
structures reality itself? Let us explain by starting from the fundamental 
Lacanian thesis that in the opposition between dream and reality, fantasy 
is on the side of reality: it is, as Lacan once said, the support that gives 
consistency to what we call ‘reality’. 

In his seminar on the Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis, Lacan 
develops this through an interpretation of the well-known dream about 
the ‘burning child’: 

A father had been watching beside his child's sick-bed for days and 
nights on end. After the child had died, he went into the next room to 
lie down, but left the door open so that he could see from his bedroom 
into the room in which his child’s body was laid out, with tall candles 
standing round it. An old man had been engaged to keep watch over 
it, and sat beside the body murmuring prayers. Af ter a few hours’ sleep, 
the father had a dream that his child was standing beside his bed, caught 
him by the arm and whispered to him reproachfully: ‘Father, don’tyouseel’m 
burning?’ He woke up, noticed a bright glare of light from the next 
room, hurried into it and found the old watchman had dropped off to 
sleep and that the wrappings and one of the arms of his beloved child’s 
dead body had been burned by a lighted candle that had fallen on 
them. 18 

The usual interpretation of this dream is based on a thesis that one of the 
functions of the dream is to enable the dreamer to prolong his sleep. The 
sleeper is suddenly exposed to an exterior irritation, a stimulus coming 
from reality (the ringing of an alarm clock, knocking on the door or, in 
this case, the smell of smoke), and to prolong his sleep he quickly, on the 


28 Freud, The Interpretation of Dreams, p. 652. 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM? 


45 


spot, constructs a dream: a little scene, a small story, which includes this 
irritating element. However, the external irritation soon becomes too 
strong and the subject is awakened. 

The Lacanian reading is directly opposed to this. The subject does 
not awake himself when the external irritation becomes too strong; the 
logic of his awakening is quite different. First he constructs a dream, a 
story which enables him to prolong his sleep, to avoid awakening into 
reality. But the thing that he encounters in the dream, the reality of his 
desire, the Lacanian Real - in our case, the reality of the child’s reproach 
to his father, ‘Can’t you see that I am burning?’, implying the father’s 
fundamental guilt - is more terrifying than so-called external reality 
itself, and that is why he awakens: to escape the Real of his desire, which 
announces itself in the terrifying dream. He escapes into so-called reality 
to be able to continue to sleep, to maintain his blindness, to elude awak- 
ening into the Real of his desire. We can rephrase here the old ‘hippy’ 
motto of the 1960s: reality is for those who cannot support the dream. 
‘Reality’ is a fantasy-construction which enables us to mask the Real of 
our desire. 2 ’ 

It is exactly the same with ideology. Ideology is not a dreamlike illusion 
that we build to escape insupportable reality; in its basic dimension it is 
a fantasy-construction which serves as a support for our ‘reality’ itself an 
‘illusion’ which structures our effective, real social relations and thereby 
masks some insupportable, real, impossible kernel (conceptualized by 
Ernesto Laclau and Chantal Mouffe as ‘antagonism’: a traumatic social 
division which cannot be symbolized). The function of ideology is not to 
offer us a point of escape from our reality but to offer us the social reality 
itself as an escape from some traumatic, real kernel. To explain this logic, 
let us refer again to The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psycho-Analysis . 10 Here 
Lacan mentions the well-known paradox of Zhuang Zi, who dreamt of 
being a butterfly, and after his awakening posed himself a question: how 

29 Jacques Lacan, The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psycho Analysis, Harmondsworth: 
Penguin, 1979, chapters 5 and 6 . 

30 Ibid., Chapter 6 . 



46 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


does he know that he is not now a butterfly dreaming of being Zhuang 
Zi? Lacan’s commentary is that this question is justified, for two reasons. 

First, it proves that Zhuang Zi was not a fool. The Lacanian definition 
ofa fool is somebody who believes in his immediate identity with himself; 
somebody who is not capable ofa dialectically mediated distance towards 
himself, like a king who thinks he is a king, who takes his being-a-king 
as his immediate property and not as a symbolic mandate imposed on 
him by a network of intersub jective relations of which he is a part (example 
of a king who was a fool thinking he was a king: Ludwig II of Bavaria, 
Wagner’s patron). 

However, this is not all; if it were, the subject could be reduced to a 
void, to an empty place in which his or her whole content is procured 
by others, by the symbolic network of intersubjective relations: I am ‘in 
myself a nothingness, the positive content of myself is what I am for 
others. In other words, if this were all, Lacan’s last word would be a 
radical alienation of the subject. His content, ‘what he is’, would be 
determined by an exterior signifying network offering him the points 
ofsymbolic identification, conferring on him certainsymbolic mandates. 
But Lacan’s basic thesis, at least in his last works, is that there is a possi- 
bility for the subject to obtain some contents, some kind of positive 
consistency, also outside the big Other, the alienating symbolic network. 
This other possibility is that offered by fantasy: equating the subject to 
an object of fantasy. When he was thinking that he was a butterfly dream- 
ing of being Zhuang Zi, Zhuang Zi was in a way correct. The butterfly 
was the object which constituted the frame, the backbone, of his fantasy- 
identity (the relationship Zhuang Zi-butterjly can be written ?0 a). In the 
symbolic reality he was Zhuang Zi, but in the Real of his desire he was 
a butterfly. Being a butterfly was the whole consistency of his positive 
being outside the symbolic network. Perhaps it is not quite by accident 
that we find a kind of echo of this in Terry Gilliam’s film Brazil, which 
depicts, in a disgustingly funny way, a totalitarian society: the hero finds 
an ambiguous point of escape from everyday reality in his dream of 
being a man-butterfly. 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM' 


47 


At first sight, what we have here is a simple symmetrical inversion of 
the so-called normal, ordinary perspective. In our everyday understanding, 
Zhuang Zi is the ‘real’ person dreaming of being a butterfly, and here we 
have something which is ‘really’ a butterfly dreaming of being Zhuang 
Zi. But as Lacan points out, this symmetrical relationship is an illusion: 
when Zhuang Zi is awakened, he can think to himself that he is Zhuang 
Zi who dreamed ofbeing a butterfly, but in his dream, when he is a butter- 
fly, he cannot ask himself if when awoken, when he thought he was 
Zhuang Zi, he was not this butterfly that is now dreaming ofbeing Zhuang 
Zi. The question, the dialectical split, is possible only when we are awake. 
In other words, the illusion cannot be symmetrical, it cannot run both 
ways, because ifit did we would find ourselves in a nonsensical situation 
described - again - by Alphonse Allais: Raoul and Marguerite, two lovers, 
arrange to meet at a masked ball; there they skip into a hidden corner, 
embrace and fondle each other. Finally, they both put down their masks, 
and - surprise - Raoul finds that he is embracing the wrong woman, that 
she is not Marguerite, and Marguerite also finds that the other person is 
not Raoul but some unknown stranger . . . 


Fantasy as a support of reality 

This problem must be approached from the Lacanian thesis that it is only 
in the dream that we come close to the real awakening - that is, to the 
Real of our desire. When Lacan says that the last support of what we call 
‘reality’ is a fantasy, this is definitely not to be understood in the sense of 
'life is just a dream', ‘what we call reality is just an illusion’, and so forth. 
We find such a theme in many science-fiction stories: reality as a gener- 
alized dream or illusion. The story is usually told from the perspective of 
a hero who gradually makes the horrifying discovery that all the people 
around him are not really human beings but some kind of automatons, 
robots, who only look and act like real human beings; the final point of 
these stories is of course the hero’s discovery that he himself is also such 
an automaton and not a real human being. Such a generalized illusion is 



48 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


impossible: we find the same paradox in a well-known drawing by Escher 
of two hands drawing each other. 

The Lacanian thesis is, on the contrary, that there is always a hard 
kernel, a leftover which persists and cannot be reduced to a universal play 
of illusory mirroring. The difference between Lacan and ‘naive realism’ is 
that for Lacan, the only point at which we approach this hard kernel of the Real 
is indeed the dream. When we awaken into reality after a dream, we usually 
say to ourselves ‘it was just a dream’, thereby blinding ourselves to the 
fact that in our everyday, wakening reality we are nothing but a consciousness 
of this dream. It was only in the dream that we approached the fantasy- 
framework which determines our activity, our mode of acting in reality 
itself 

It is the same with the ideological dream, with the determination of 
ideology as a dreamlike construction hindering us from seeing the real 
state of things, reality as such. In vain do we try to break out of the ideo- 
logical dream by ‘opening our eyes and trying to see reality as it is’, by 
throwing away the ideological spectacles: as the subjects of such a post- 
ideological, objective, sober look, free of so-called ideological prejudices, 
as the subjects of a look which views the facts as they are, we remain 
throughout 'the consciousness of our ideological dream’. The only way to 
break the power of our ideological dream is to confront the Rea! of cur 
desire which announces itself in this dream. 

Let us examine anti-Semitism. It is not enough to say that we must 
liberate ourselves from so-called ‘anti-Semitic prejudices’ and learn to see 
Jews as they really are - in this way we will certainly remain victims of 
these so-called prejudices. We must confront ourselves with how the 
ideological figure of the ‘Jew’ is invested with our unconscious desire, with 
how we have constructed this figure to escape a certain deadlock of our 
desire. 

Let us suppose, for example, that an objective look would confirm - 
why not? - that Jews really do financially exploit the rest of the population, 
that they do sometimes seduce our young daughters, that some of them 
do not wash regularly. Is it not clear that this has nothing to do with the 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM! 


49 


real roots ofouranti-Semitism? Here, we have only to remember the Lacan- 
ian proposition concerning the pathologically jealous husband: even if all 
the facts he quotes in support of his jealousy are true, even if his wife 
really is sleeping around with other men, this does not change one bit the 
fact that his jealousy is a pathological, paranoid construction. 

Let us ask ourselves a simple question: in the Germany of the late 1930s, 
what would be the result of such a non-ideological, objective approach? 
Probably something like: ‘The Nazis are condemning the Jews too hastily, 
without proper argument, so let us take a cool, sober look and see if they 
are really guilty or not; let us see if there is some truth in the accusations 
against them.’ Is it really necessary to add that such an approach would 
merely confirm our so-called ‘unconscious prejudices’ with additional 
rationalizations? The proper answer to anti-Semitism is therefore not ‘Jews 
are really not like that’ but 'the anti-Semitic idea of Jew has nothing to 
do with Jews; the ideological figure of a Jew is a way to stitch up the incon- 
sistency of our own ideological system.’ 

That is why we are also unable to shake so-called ideological prejudices 
by taking into account the pre-ideological level of everyday experience. 
The basis of this argument is that the ideological construction always 
finds its limits in the field of everyday experience - that it is unable to 
reduce, to contain, to absorb and annihilate this level. Let us again take a 
typical individual in Germany in the late 1930s. He is bombarded by 
anti-Semitic propaganda depicting a Jew as a monstrous incarnation of 
Evil, the great wire-puller, and so on. But when he returns home he 
encounters Mr Stern, his neighbour, a good man to chat with in the 
evenings, whose children play with his. Does not this everyday experience 
offer an irreducible resistance to the ideological construction? 

The answer is, of course, no. If everyday experience offers such a resist- 
ance, then the anti-Semitic ideology has not yet really grasped us. An ideol- 
ogy is really ‘holding us’ only when we do not feel any opposition between 
it and reality - that is, when the ideology succeeds in determining the 
mode of our everyday experience of reality itself. How then would our 
poor German, ifhe were a good anti-Semite, react to this gap between the 



50 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


ideological figure of the Jew (schemer, wire-puller, exploiting our brave 
men and so on] and the common everyday experience of his good neigh- 
bour, Mr Stern? His answer would be to turn this gap, this discrepancy 
itself into an argument for anti-Semitism: ‘You see how dangerous they 
really are? It is difficult to recognize their real nature. They hide it behind 
the mask of everyday appearance - and it is exactly this hiding of one’s 
real nature, this duplicity, that is a basic feature of the Jewish nature.’ An 
ideology really succeeds when even the facts which at first sight contradict 
it start to function as arguments in its favour. 


Surplus-value and surplus-enjoyment 

Herein lies the difference from Marxism: in the predominant Marxist 
perspective the ideological gaze is a partial gaze overlooking the totality of 
social relations, whereas in the Lacanian perspective ideology rather 
designates a totality set on effacing the traces of its own impossibility. This differ- 
ence corresponds to the one which distinguishes the Freudian from the 
Marxian notion of fetishism: in Marxism a fetish conceals the positive 
network of social relations, whereas in Freud a fetish conceals the lack 
(‘castration’) around which the symbolic network is articulated. 

In so far as we conceive the Real as that which ‘always returns to the same 
place’, we can deduce another, no less crucial difference. From the Marxist 
point of view, the ideological procedure par excellence is that of Jalse' etemd- 
ization and/or universalization: a state which depends on a concrete historical 
conjunction appears as an eternal, universal feature of the human condition; 
the interest of a particular class disguises itself as universal human interest 
. . . and the aim of the ‘criticism of ideology’ is to denounce this false 
universality, to detect behind man in general the bourgeois individual; 
behind the universal rights of man the form which renders possible capitalist 
exploitation; behind the ‘nuclear family’ as a trans-historical constant the 
historically specified and limited form of kinship relations, and so on. 

In the Lacanian perspective, we should change the terms and desig- 
nate as the most ‘cunning’ ideological procedure the very opposite of 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM? 51 


extemalization: an over-rapid historicization. Let us take one of the common- 
places of the Marxist-feminist criticism of psychoanalysis, the idea that 
its insistence on the crucial role of the Oedipus complex and the nuclear- 
family triangle transforms a historically conditioned form of patriarchal 
family into a feature of the universal human condition: is not this effort 
to historicize the family triangle precisely an attempt to elude the ‘hard 
kernel’ which announces itselfthrough the ‘patriarchal family’ - the Real 
of the Law, the rock of castration? In other words, if over-rapid universal- 
ization produces a quasi-universal Image whose function is to make us 
blind to its historical, socio-symbolic determination, over-rapid 
historicization makes us blind to the real kernel which returns as the same 
through diverse historicizations/symbolizations. 

It is the same with a phenomenon that designates most accurately the 
‘perverse’ obverse of twentieth-century civilization: concentration camps. 
All the different attempts to attach this phenomenon to a concrete image 
(‘Holocaust’, ‘Gulag’ . . . ), to reduce it to a product of a concrete social 
order (Fascism, Stalinism . . . ] - what are they if not so many attempts to 
elude the fact that we are dealing here with the ‘real’ of our civilization 
which returns as the same traumatic kernel in all social systems? (We 
should not forget that concentration camps were an invention of ‘liberal’ 
England, dating from the Boer War; that they were also used in the US to 
isolate the Japanese population, and so on.) 

Marxism, then, did not succeed in taking into account, coming to terms 
with, the surplus-object, the leftover of the Real eluding symbolization - 
a feet all the more surprising if we recall that Lacan modelled his notion 
of surplus-enjoyment on the Marxian notion of surplus-value. The proof 
that Marxian surplus-value announces effectively the logic of the Lacanian 
objet petit a as the embodiment of surplus-enjoyment is already provided 
by the decisive formula used by Marx, in the third volume of Capital, to 
designate the logical-historical limit of capitalism: ‘the limit of capital is 
capital itself, i.e. the capitalist mode of production’. 

This formula can be read in two ways. The first, usual historicist- 
evolutionist reading conceives it, in accordance with the unfortunate 



52 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


paradigm ofthe dialectics of productive forces and relations of production, 
as that of ‘content’ and ‘form’. This paradigm follows roughly the metaphor 
of the serpent which, from time to time, sheds its skin, which has grown 
too tight: one posits as the last impetus of social development - as its (so 
to speak) ‘natural’, ‘spontaneous’ constant - the incessant growth of the 
productive forces (as a rule reduced to technical development); this ‘spon- 
taneous’ growth is then followed, with a greater or lesser degree of delay, 
by the inert, dependent moment, the relationship of production. We have 
thus epochs in which the relations of production are in accordance with 
the productive forces, then those forces develop and outgrow their ‘social 
clothes’, the frame of relationships; this frame becomes an obstacle to their 
further development, until social revolution again co-ordinates forces and 
relations by replacing the old relations with new ones which correspond 
to the new state of forces. 

If we conceive the formula of capital as its own limit from this point 
of view, it means simply that the capitalist relation of production which 
at first made possible the fast development of productive forces became 
at a certain point an obstacle to their further development: that these 
forces have outgrown their frame and demand a new form of social 
relations. 

Marx himself is of course far from such a simplistic evolutionary idea. 
If we need convincing of this, we have only to look at the passages in 
Capital where he deals with the relation between formal and real subsump- 
tion ofthe process of production under Capital: the formal subsumption 
precedes the real one; that is, Capital first subsumes the process ofproduction 
as it found it (artisans, and so on), and only subsequently does it change 
the productive forces step by step, shaping them in such a way as to create 
correspondence. Contrary to the above-mentioned simplistic idea, it is 
then the form of the relation of production which drives the development 
of productive forces - that is, of its ‘content’. 

All we have to do to render impossible the simplistic evolutionary 
reading of the formula ‘the limit of capital is capital itself is to ask a very 
simple and obvious question: how do we define, exactly, the moment - 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM! 


53 


albeit only an ideal one - at which the capitalist relation of production 
become an obstacle to the further development of the productive forces? 
Or the obverse of the same question: when can we speak of an accordance 
between productive forces and relation of production in the capitalist 
mode of production? Strict analysis leads to only one possible answer: 
never. 

This is exactly how capitalism differs from other, previous modes of 
production: in the latter, we can speak ofperiods of'accordance’ when the 
process of social production and reproduction goes on as a quiet, circular 
movement, and of periods of convulsion when the contradiction 
between forces and relations aggravates itself; whereas in capitalism 
this contradiction, thediscord forces/relations, is contained in itsvery concept 
(in the form of the contradiction between the social mode of production 
and the individual, private mode of appropriation). It is this internal 
contradiction which compels capitalism to permanent extended repro- 
duction - to the incessant development of its own conditions of production, 
incontrast to previous modes of production where, at least in their ‘normal’ 
state, (re)production goes on as a circular movement. 

If this is so, then the evolutionist reading of the formula of capital as 
its own limit is inadequate: the point is not that, at a certain moment of 
its development, the frame ofthe relation of production starts to constrict 
further development of the productive forces; the point is that it is this 
very immanent limit, this ‘internal contradiction’, which drives capitalism into 
permanent development. The ‘normal’ state of capitalism is the permanent 
revolutionizing of its own conditions ofexistence: from the very beginning 
capitalism ‘putrefies’, it is branded by a crippling contradiction, discord, 
by an immanent want of balance: this is exactly why it changes, develops 
incessantly - incessant development is the only way for it to resolve again 
and again, come to terms with, its own fundamental, constitutive 
imbalance, ‘contradiction’. Far from constricting, its limit is thus the very 
impetus of its development. Herein lies the paradox proper to capitalism, 
its last resort: capitalism is capable of transforming its limit, its very 
impotence, in the source of its power - the more it ‘putrefies’, the more 



54 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


its immanent contradiction is aggravated, the mote it must revolutionize 
itself to survive. 

It is this paradox which defines surplus-enjoyment: it is not a surplus 
which simply attaches itself to some ‘normal’, fundamental enjoyment, 
because enjoyment as such emerges only in this surplus, because it is constitu- 
tively an ‘excess’. If we subtract the surplus we lose enjoyment itself, just 
as capitalism, which can survive only by incessantly revolutionizing its 
own material conditions, ceases to exist ifit ‘stays the same’, ifit achieves 
an internal balance. This, then, is the homology between surplus-value - 
the ‘cause’ which sets in motion the capitalist process of production - and 
surplus-enjoyment, the object-cause of desire. Is not the paradoxical 
topology of the movement of capital, the fundamental blockage which 
resolves and reproduces itself through frenetic activity, excessive power as 
the very form of appearance of a fundamental impotence - this immediate 
passage, this coincidence of limit and excess, oflack and surplus - precisely 
that of the Lacanian objet petit a, of the leftover which embodies the 
fundamental, constitutive lack? 

All this, of course, Marx ‘knows very well . . . and yet’: and yet, in the 
crucial formulation in the Preface to the Critique of Political Economy, he 
proceeds as if he does not know it, by describing the very passage from 
capitalism to socialism in terms of the above-mentioned vulgar evolu- 
tionist dialectics of productive forces and the relations of production: when 
the forces surpass a certain degree, capitalist relations become an obstacle 
to their further development: this discord brings about the need for social- 
ist revolution, the function of which is to co-ordinate again forces and 
relations; that is, to establish relations of production rendering possible 
the intensified development of the productive forces as the end-in-itself 
of the historical process. 

How can we not detect in this formulation the fact that Marx failed 
to cope with the paradoxes of surplus-enj oyment? And the ironic vengeance 
of history for this failure is that today there exists a society which seems 
to correspond perfectly to this vulgar evolutionary dialectics of forces and 
relations: ‘real socialism’, a society which legitimizes itself by reference to 



HOW DID MARX INVENT THE SYMPTOM! 


55 


Marx. Is it not already a commonplace to assert that ‘real socialism’ 
rendered possible rapid industrialization, but that as soon as the productive 
forces reached a certain level of development (usually designated by the 
vague term ‘post-industrial society’), ‘real socialist’ social relationships 
began to constrict their further growth? 




2 From Symptom to Sinthome 


The Dialectics of the Symptom 


Back to the future 

The only reference to the domain ofscience fiction in Lacan’s work concerns 
the time paradox: in his first seminar, Lacan uses Norbert Wiener’s 
metaphor of the inverted direction of time to explain the symptom as a 
return of the repressed’: 

Wiener posits two beings each of whose temporal dimensions moves 
in the opposite direction from the other. Tobesure, that means nothing, 
and that is how things which mean nothing all of a sudden signify 
something, but in a quite different domain. If one of them sends a 
message to the other, for example a square, the being going in the 
opposite direction will first ofall see the square vanishing, before seeing 
the square. That is what we see as well. The symptom initially appears 
to us as a trace, which will only ever be a trace, one which will continue 
not to be understood until the analysis has got quite a long way, and 
until we have realized its meaning . 1 

The analysis is thus conceived as a symbolization, a symbolic integration 
of meaningless imaginary traces; this conception implies a fundamentally 

i Jacques Lacan, The Seminar of Jacques Lacan, Book I: Freud’s Papers on Technique, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988, p. 159. 



58 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


imaginary character of the unconscious: it is made of ‘imaginary fixations 
which could not have been assimilated to the symbolic development' of 
the subject’s history; consequently, it is ‘something which will be realized 
in the Symbolic, or, more precisely, something which, thanks to the 
symbolic progress which takes place in the analysis, will have been’. 2 

The Lacanian answer to the question ‘From where does the repressed 
return?’ is therefore, paradoxically, ‘From the future.’ Symptoms are 
meaningless traces, their meaning is not discovered, excavated from the 
hidden depth of the past, but constructed retroactively - the analysis 
produces the truth; that is, the signifying frame which gives the symp- 
toms their symbolic place and meaning. As soon as we enter the symbolic 
order, the past is always present in the form of historical tradition and 
the meaning of these traces is not given; it changes continually with 
the transformations of the signifier’s network. Every historical rupture, 
every advent of a new master-signifier, changes retroactively the 
meaning of all tradition, restructures the narration of the past, makes 
it readable in another, new way. 

Thus, ‘things which mean nothing all of a sudden signify something, 
but in a quite different domain’. What is a journey into the future’ if not 
this ‘overtaking’ by means of which we suppose in advance the presence 
in the other of a certain knowledge - knowledge about the meaning of our 
symptoms - what is it, then, if not the transference itself? This knowledge 
is an illusion, it does not really exist in the other, the other does not really 
possess it, it is constituted afterwards, through our - the subject’s - signi- 
fier’s working; but it is at the same time a necessary illusion, because we 
can paradoxically elaborate this knowledge only by means of the illusion 
that the other already possesses it and that we are only discovering it. 

If - as Lacan points out - in the symptom, the repressed content is 
returning from the future and not from the past, then the transference - 
the actualization of the reality of the unconscious - must transpose us 
into the future, not into the past. And what is the journey into the past’ 


2 Ibid., p. 158. 



FROM SYMPTOM TO SINTHOME 


59 


if not this retroactive working-through, elaboration, of the signifier itself? 
- a kind of hallucinatory mise-en-scene of the fact that in the field of the 
signifier and only in this field, we can change, we can bring about the 
past? 

The past exists as it is included, as it enters (into) the synchronous net 
ofthe signifier - that is, as it is symbolized in the texture of the historical 
memory - and that is why we are all the time ‘rewriting history’, retroactively 
giving the elements their symbolic weight by including them in new 
textures - it is this elaboration which decides retroactively what they ‘will 
have been’. The Oxford philosopher Michael Dummett has written two 
very interesting articles included in his collection of essays Truth and Other 
Enigmas: ‘Can an Effect Precede its Cause?’ and ‘Bringing About the Past’: 
the Lacanian answer to these two enigmas would be: yes, because the 
symptom as a ‘return of the repressed’ is precisely such an effect which 
precedes its cause (its hidden kernel, its meaning), and in working through 
the symptom we are precisely ‘bringing about the pas t’ - we are producing 
the symbolic reality of past, long-forgotten traumatic events. 

One is therefore tempted to see in the ‘time paradox’ of science-fiction 
novels a kind of hallucinatory ‘apparition in the Real’ of the elementary 
structure ofthe sy mbo lie process, the so-called internal, internally inverted 
eight: a circular movement, a kind of snare where we can progress only 
in such a manner that we ‘overtake’ ourselves in the transference, to find 
ourselves later at a point at which we have already been. The paradox 
consists in the fact that this superfluous detour, this supplementary snare 
of overtaking ourselves (‘voyage into the future’) and then reversing the 
time direction (‘voyage into the past’) is not just a subjective illusion/ 
perception of an objective process taking place in so-called reality inde- 
pendently of these illusions. That supplementary snare is, rather, an 
internal condition, an internal constituent of the so-called ‘objective’ 
process itself: only through this additional detour does the past itself, the 
‘objective’ state of things, become retroactively what it always was. 

Transference is, then, an illusion, but the point is that we cannot bypass 
it and reach directly for the Truth: the Truth itself is constituted through 



60 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


the illusion proper to the transference - ‘the Truth arises from misrecog- 
nition’ (Lacan). If this paradoxical structure is not yet clear, let us take 
another science-fiction example, William Tenn’s well-known story 'The 
Discovery of Morniel Mathaway’. A distinguished art historian takes a 
journey in a time machine from the twenty-fifth century to our day to 
visit and study in vivo the immortal Morniel Mathaway, a painter not 
appreciated in our time but later discovered to have been the greatest 
painter of the era. When he encounters him, the art historian finds no 
trace of a genius, just an imposter, a megalomaniac, even a swindler who 
steals his time machine from him and escapes into the future, so that the 
poor art historian stays tied to our time. The only action open to him is 
to assume the identity of the escaped Mathaway and to paint under his 
name all his masterpieces that he remembers from the future - it is he 
himself who is really the misrecognized genius he was looking for! 

This, therefore, is the basic paradox we are aiming at: the subject is 
confronted with a scene from the past that he wants to change, to meddle 
with, to intervene in; he takes a journey into the past, intervenes in the 
scene, and it is not that he ‘cannot change anything’ - quite the contrary, 
only through his intervention does the scene from the past become what it 
always was: his intervention was from the beginning comprised, included. 
The initial ‘illusion’ of the subject consists in simply forgetting to include 
in the scene his own act - that is, to overlook how ‘it counts, it is counted, 
and the one who counts is already included in the account ’. 3 This introduces 
a relationship between truth and misrecognition/misapprehension by 
which the Truth, literally, arises from misrecognition, as in the well- 
known story about the ‘appointment in Samarra’ (from Somerset 
Maugham’s play Sheppey): 

DEATH: There was a merchant in Bagdad who sent his servant to 

market to buy provisions and in a little while the servant came back, 

white and trembling, and said, Master, just now when I was in the 


3 Lacan, T he Four Fundamental Concepts of Psycho Analysis, p. 26. 



FROM SYMPTOM TO SINTHOM E 


61 


market-place, I was j ostled by a woman i n the crowd and when I turned 
I saw it was death that jostled me. She looked at me and made a threat- 
ening gesture; now, lend me your horse, and I will ride away from this 
city and avoid my fate. I will go to Samarra and there death will not 
find me. The merchant lent him his horse, and the servant mounted 
it, and he dug his spurs in its flanks and as fast as the horse could 
gallop he went. Then the merchant went down to the marketplace and 
he saw me standing in the crowd and he came to me and said, Why 
did you make a threatening gesture to my servant when you saw him 
this morning? That was not a threatening gesture, I said, it was only 
a start of surprise. I was astonished to see him in Bagdad, for I had an 
appointment with him tonight in Samarra. 

We find the same structure in the myth of Oedipus: it is predicted to Oedi- 
pus’s father that his son will kill him and marry his mother, and the 
prophecy realizes itselfl 'becomes true’, through the father’s attempt to 
evade it (he exposes his little son in the forest, and so Oedipus, not recog- 
nizing him when he encounters him twenty years later, kills him . . . ). 
In other words, the prophecy becomes true by means of its being commu- 
nicated to the persons it affects and by means of his or her attempt to 
elude it: one knows in advance one’s destiny, one tries to evade it, and it 
is by means of this very attempt that the predicted destiny realizes itself 
Without the prophecy, the little Oedipus would live happily with his 
parents and there would be no ‘Oedipus complex’ . . . 


Repetition in History 

The time structure with which we are concerned here is such that it is 
mediated through subjectivity: the subjective ‘mistake’, ‘fault’, ‘error’, 
misrecognition, arrives paradoxically before the ttuth in relation to which 
we are designating it as ‘error’, because this ‘truth’ itself becomes true 
only through - or, to use a Hegelian term, by mediation of - the error. 
This is the logic of the unconscious ‘cunning’, the way the unconscious 



62 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


deceives us: the unconscious is not a kind of transcendent, unattainable 
thing of which we are unable to take cognizance, it is rather - to follow 
Lacan’s wordplay-translation of Unbewusste - une bevue, an overlooking: we 
overlook the way our act is already part of the state of things we are looking 
at, the way our error is part of the Truth itself. This paradoxical structure 
in which the Truth arises from misrecognition also gives us the answer 
to the question: why is the transference necessary, why must the analysis 
go through it? The transference is an essential illusion by means of which 
the final Truth (the meaning of a symptom) is produced. 

We find the same logic of the error as an internal condition of truth 
with Rosa Luxemburg, with her description of the dialectics of the revo- 
lutionary process. We are alluding here to her argument against Eduard 
Bernstein, against his revisionist fear of seizing power ‘too soon’, ‘prema- 
turely’, before the so-called ‘objective conditions’ had ripened - this was, 
as is well known, Bernstein’s main reproach to the revolutionary wing of 
social democracy: they are too impatient, they want to hasten, to outrun 
the objective logic of historical development. Rosa Luxemburg’s answer 
is that the first seizures of power are necessarily premature’: the only way 
for the working class to reach its ‘maturity’, to await the arrival of the 
‘appropriate moment’ for the seizure of power, is to form itself, to educate 
itself for this act of seizure, and the only possible way of achieving this 
education is precisely the ‘premature’ attempts ... If we merely wait for 
the ‘appropriate moment’ we will never live to see it, because this ‘appro- 
priate moment’ cannot arrive without the subjective conditions of the 
maturity of the revolutionary force (subject) being fulfilled - that is, it 
can arrive only after a series of ‘premature’, failed attempts. The opposition 
to the ‘premature’ seizure of power is thus revealed as opposition to the 
seizure of power as such, ingeneral: to repeat Robespierre’s famous phrase, 
the revisionists want a ‘revolution without revolution’. 

If we look at this closely, we perceive that what is at stake in Rosa 
Luxemburg’s argument is precisely the impossibility of metalanguage in 
the revolutionary process: the revolutionary subject does not ‘conduct’, 
‘direct’ this process from an objective distance, he is constituted through 



FROM SYMPTOM TO SINTHOME 


63 


this process, and because of this - because the temporality of the revolution 
passes through subjectivity - we cannot ‘make the revolution at the right 
moment without the previous ‘premature’, failed attempts. Here, in the 
opposition between Bernstein and Luxemburg, we have the opposition 
between the obsessional (man) and the hysterical (woman): the obsessional 
is delaying, putting off the act, waiting for the right moment, while the 
hysteric (so to speak) overtakes herself in her act and thus unmasks the 
falsity of the obsessional’s position. This is also what is at stake in Hegel’s 
theory of the role of repetition in history: ‘a political revolution is generally 
sanctioned by the opinion of the people only when it is renewed’ - that 
is, it can succeed only as a repetition of a first failed attempt. Why this 
need for repetition? 

Hegel developed his theory of repetition apropos of the case of Julius 
Caesar’s death: when Caesar consolidated his personal power and strength- 
ened it to imperial proportions, he acted ‘objectively’ (in itself) in accor- 
dance with historical truth, historical necessity - the Republican form was 
losing its validity, the only form of government which could save the 
unity of the Roman state was monarchy, a state based upon the will of a 
single individual; but it was still the Republic which prevailed formally 
(for itself, in the opinion of the people) - the Republic ‘was still alive only 
because she forgot that she was already dead’, to paraphrase the famous 
Freudian dream of the father who did not know he was already dead: ‘His 
father was alive once more and was talking to him in his usual way, but [the 
remarkable thing was tha] he had really died, only he did not know iid 

To the ‘opinion’ which still believed in the Republic, Caesar’s amassing 
of personal power - which was, of course, contrary to the spirit of the 
Republic - appeared an arbitrary act, an expression o fcontingent individual 
self-will: the conclusion was that if this individual (Caesar) were to be 
removed, the Republic would regain its full splendour. But it was precisely 
the conspirators against Caesar (Brutus, Cassius, and the others) who - 
following the logic of the ‘cunning of reason’ - attested the Truth (thatis, the historical necessity) of Caesar: the final result, the outcome of 
Caesar’s murder, was the reign of Augustus, the first caesar. The Truth 
thus arose from failure itself: in failing, in missing its express goal, the 
murder of Caesar fulfilled the task which was, in a Machiavellian way, 
assigned to it by history: to exhibit the historical necessity by denouncing 
its own non-truth - its own arbitrary, contingent character . 5 

The whole problem of repetition is here: in this passage from Caesar 
(the name of an individual) to caesar (title of the Roman emperor). The 
murder of Caesar - historical personality - provoked, as its final result, 
the installation of caesansm: Caesar-person repeats itself as caesar-title. What 
is the reason, the driving force, of this repetition? At first sight the answer 
seems to be clear: the delay of the consciousness as to the 'objective’ histor- 
ical necessity. A certain act through which breaks historical necessity is 
perceived by the consciousness (the ‘opinion of the people’) as arbitrary, 
as something which also could not have happened; because of this percep- 
tion people try to do away with its consequences, to restore the old state 
of things, but when this act repeats itself it is finally perceived as an expres- 
sion of the underlying historical necessity. In other words, repetition is 
the way historical necessity asserts itself in the eyes of ‘opinion’. 

But such an idea of repetition rests upon the epistemologically naive 
presupposition of an objective historical necessity, persisting independ- 
ently of consciousness (of the ‘opinion of the people’) and asserting itself 
finally through repetition. What is lost in this notion is the way so-called 
historical necessity itself is constituted through misrecognition, through the 
initial failure of ‘opinion’ to recognize its true character - that is, the way 
truth itself arises from misrecognition. The crucial point here is the 
changed symbolic status of an event: when it erupts for the first time it 
is experienced as a contingent trauma, as an intrusion of a certain non- 
symbolized Real; only through repetition is this event recognized in its 
symbolic necessity - it finds its place in the symbolic network; it is 

5 G. W. F. Hegel, Vorlcsungen iiber die Philosophic der Gcsc/uc/ue, Frankfurt: Surkhamp 
Verlag, 1969, pp. 111 13. 



FROM SYMPTOM TO SINTHOME 65 


realized in the symbolic order. But as with Moses in Freud’s analysis, this 
recognition-through-repetition presupposes necessarily the crime, the act 
of murder: to realize himself in his symbolic necessity - as a power-title 
- Caesar has to die as an empirical, flesh-and-blood personality, precisely 
because the ‘necessity’ in question is a symbolic one. 

It is not only that in its first form of appearance, the event (for example, 
Caesar’s amassing of individual power) was too traumatic for the people 
to grasp its real signification - the misrecognition of its first advent is 
immediately ‘internal’ to its symbolic necessity, it is an immediate 
constituent of its final recognition. The first murder (the parricide of 
Caesar) opened up the guilt, and it was this guilt, this debt, which was 
the real driving force of the repetition. The event did not repeat itself 
because of some objective necessity, independent of our subjective 
inclination and thus irresistible, but because its repetition was a repayment 
of our symbolic debt. 

In other words, the repetition announces the advent of the Law, of the 
Name-of-the-Father in place of the dead, assassinated father: the event 
which repeats itself receives its law retroactively, through repetition. That 
is why we can grasp Hegelian repetition as a passage from a lawless series 
to a lawlike series, as the inclusion of a lawless series - as a gesture of 
inteipretation par excellence, as a symbolic appropriation of a traumatic, 
non-sy mbolized event (according to Lacan, interpretation always proceeds 
under the sign of the Name-of-the-Father). Hegel was thus probably the 
first to articulate the delay which is constitutive of the act of interpretation: 
the interpretationalways sets in too late, with some delay, when the event 
which is to be interpreted repeats itself; the event cannot already be lawlike 
in its first advent. This same delay is also formulated in the Preface to 
Hegel’s Philosophy of the Law, in the famous passage about the owl of 
Minerva (that is, the philosophical comprehension of a certain epoch), 
which takes flight only in the evening after this epoch has already come 
to its end. 

The fact that the ‘opinion of the people’ saw in Caesar’s action an 
individual contingency and not an expression of historical necessity is 



66 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


therefore not a simple case of 'delay of the consciousness in relation to the 
effectivity’: the point is that this necessity itself- which was misrecognized 
by opinion in its first manifestation; that is, mistaken for a contingent 
self-will - constitutes itself, realizes itself, through this misrecognition. 
And we should not be surprised to find the same logic of repetition in the 
history of the psychoanalytic movement: it was necessary for Lacan to 
repeat his split with the International Psycho-Analytical Association. The 
first split (in 15153) was still experienced as a traumatic contingency - 
Lacanians were still trying to patch things up with the IPA, to regain 
admission - but in 1564 it also became clear to their ‘opinion’ that there 
was a necessity in this split, so they cut their links with the IPA and Lacan 
constituted his own School. 


Hegel with Austen 

Austen, not Austin: it is Jane Austen who is perhaps the only counterpart 
to Hegel in literature: Pride and Prejudice is the literary Phenomenology of 
Spirit ; Mansfield Park the Science of Logic and Emma the Encyclopaedia ... No 
wonder, then, that we find in Pride and Prejudice the perfect case of this 
dialectic of truth arising from misrecognition. Although they belong to 
different social classes - he is from an extremely rich aristocratic family, 
she from the impoverished middle classes - Elizabeth and Darcy feel a 
strong mutual attraction. Because of his pride, his love appears to Darcy 
as something unworthy; when he asks for Elizabeth’s hand he confesses 
openly his contempt for the world to which she belongs and expects her 
to accept his proposition as an unheard-of honour. But because of her 
prejudice, Elizabeth sees him as ostentatious, arrogant and vain: his 
condescending proposal humiliates her, and she refuses him. 

This double failure, this mutual misrecognition, possesses a structure 
of a double movement of communication where each subject receives from 
the other its own message in the inverse form: Elizabeth wants to present 
herself to Darcy as a young cultivated woman, full of wit, and she gets 
from him the message ‘you are nothing but a poor empty-minded creature, 



FROM SYMPTOM TO S/NTHOME 


67 


full of false finesse; Darcy wants to present himself to her as a proud gentle- 
man, and he gets from her the message ‘your pride is nothing but 
contemptible arrogance’. After the break in their relationship each 
discovers, through a series of accidents, the true nature of the other - she 
the sensitive and tender nature of Darcy, he her real dignity and wit - and 
the novel ends as it should, with their marriage. 

The theoretical interest of this story lies in the fact that the failure 
of their first encounter, the double misrecognition concerning the real 
nature ofthe other, functions as a positive condition of the final outcome: 
we cannot go directly for the truth, we cannot say, ‘If, from the very 
beginning, she had recognized his real nature and he hers, their story 
could have ended at once with their marriage.’ Let us take as a comical 
hypothesis that the first encounter of the future lovers was a success - 
that Elizabeth had accepted Darcy’s first proposal. What would happen? 
Instead of being bound together in true love they would become a vulgar 
everyday couple, a liaison of an arrogant, rich man and a pretentious, 
empty-minded young girl. If we want to spare ourselves the painful 
roundabout route through the misrecognition, we miss the Truth itself 
only the ‘working-through’ of the misrecognition allows us to accede 
to the true nature of the other and at the same time to overcome our 
own deficiency - for Darcy, to free himselfof his false pride; for Elizabeth, 
to get rid of her prejudices. 

These two movements are interconnected because Elizabeth encoun- 
ters, in Darcy’s pride, the inverse image of her own prejudices; and Darcy, 
in Elizabeth’s vanity, the inverse image of his own false pride. In other 
words, Darcy’s pride is not a simple, positive state of things existing 
independently ofhis relationship with Elizabeth, an immediate property 
of his nature; it takes place, it appears, only from the perspective ofherprejudices, 
vice versa, Elizabeth is a pretentious empty-minded girl only in Darcy's 
arrogant view. To articulate things in Hegelian terms: in the perceived 
deficiency of the other, each perceives - without knowing it - the falsity of 
his/her own subjective position; the deficiency of the other is simply an objec- 
tification of the distortion of our own point of view. 



68 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


Two Hegelian jokes 

There is a well-known, very Hegelian joke that illustrates perfectly the 
way truth arises from misrecognition - the way our path towards truth 
coincides with the truth itself. At the beginning of this century, a Pole 
and a Jew were sitting in a train, facing each other. The Pole was shifting 
nervously, watching the Jew all the time; something was irritating him; 
finally, unable to restrain himself any longer, he exploded: ‘Tell me, how 
do you Jews succeed in extracting from people the last small coin and 
in this way accumulate all your wealth?’ The Jew replied: ‘OK, I will tell 
you, but not for nothing; first, you give me five zloty [Polish money].’ 
After receiving the required amount, the Jew began: ‘First, you take a 
dead fish; you cut off her head and put her entrails in a glass of water. 
Then, around midnight, when the moon is full, you must bury this 
glass in a churchyard . . . ’ ‘And,’ the Pole interrupted him greedily, ‘if 
I do all this, will I also become rich?’ 'Not too quickly,’ replied the Jew; 
‘This is not all you must do; but if you want to hear the rest, you must 
pay me another five zloty!’ After receiving the money again, the Jew 
continued his story; soon afterwards, he again demanded more money, 
and so on, until finally the Pole exploded in fury: ‘You dirty rascal, do 
you really think I did not notice what you were aiming at? There is no 
secret at all, you simply want to extract the last small coin from me!’ 
The Jew answered him calmly and with resignation: ‘Well, now you see 
how we, the Jews 

Everything in this small story is susceptible to interpretation, starting 
with the curious, inquisitive way the Pole looks at the Jew - it means that 
from the very beginning the Pole is caught in a relationship of transference: 
that the Jew embodies for him the ‘subject presumed to know’ - to know 
the secret of extracting money from people. The point of the story is of 
course that the Jew has not deceived the Pole: he kept his promise and 
taught him how to extract money from people. What is crucial here is the 
double movement of the outcome - the distance between the moment 
when the Pole breaks out in fury and the Jew’s final answer. When the 



FROM SYMPTOM TO SINTHOME 69 


Pole blurts out ‘There is no secret at all, you simply want to extract the 
last small coin from me!’, he is already telling the truth without knowing 
it - that is to say, he sees, in the Jew’s manipulation, a simple deception. 
What he misses is that through this very deception the Jew kept his word, 
delivered him what he was paid for (the secret of how the Jews . . . ). The 
Pole’s error is simply his perspective: he looks forward to the ‘secret’ being 
revealed somewhere at the end; he situates the Jew’s narration as a path 
to the final revelation of the ‘secret’; but the real ‘secret’ is already in the 
narration itself: in the way the Jew, through his narration, captures the 
Pole’s desire; in the way the Pole is absorbed in this narration and prepared 
to pay for it. 

The Jew’s ‘secret’ lies, then, in our own (the Pole’s) desire: in the fact 
that the Jew knows how to take our desire into account. That is why we 
can say that the final turn of the story, with its double twist, corresponds 
to the final moment of the psychoanalytic cure, the dissolution of trans- 
ference and ‘going through the fantasy’: when the Pole breaks out in fury 
he has already stepped out of transference, but he has yet to traverse his 
fantasy - this is achieved only by realizing how, through his deception, 
the Jew has kept his word. The fascinating ‘secret’ which drives us to follow 
the Jew’s narration carefully is precisely the Lacanian objet petit a, the 
chimerical object of fantasy, the object causing our desire and at the same 
time - this is its paradox - posed retroactively by this desire; in ‘going 
through the fantasy’ we experience how this fantasy-object (the ‘secret’) 
only materializes the void of our desire. 

Another well-known joke possesses exactly the same structure, but this 
is usually overlooked - we are referring, of course, to the joke about the 
Door of the Law from the ninth chapter of Kafka’s Trial, to its final turn- 
around when the dying man from the country asks the door-keeper: 

‘Everyone strives to attain the law, how does it come about, then, that 
in all these years no one has come seeking admittance but me?’ The 
door-keeper perceives that the man is at the end of his strength and 
his hearing is failing, so he bellows in his ear: ‘No one but you could 



70 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


gain admittance through this door, since the door was intended only 
for you. I am now going to shut it.’ s 

This final twist is perfectly homologous to the one at the end of the story 
about the Pole and the Jew: the subject experiences how he (his desire) 
was part of the game from the very beginning, how the entrance was 
meant only for him, how the stake of the narration was only to capture 
his desire. We could even invent another ending for Kafka’s story to bring 
it nearer to the joke about the Pole and the Jew: after the long wait, the 
man from the country breaks out in fury and begins to cry at the door- 
keeper: ‘You dirty rascal, why do you pretend to guard the entrance to 
some enormous secret, when you know very well that there is no secret 
beyond the door, that this door is intended only for me, to capture my 
desire!’ and the door-keeper (if he were an analyst) would answer him 
calmly: ‘You see, now you’ve discovered the real secret: beyond the door 
is only what your desire introduces there 

In both cases, the nature of the final twist follows the Hegelian logic 
of surmounting, of abolishing the 'bad infinity’. That is to say, in both 
cases the starting point is the same: the subject is confronted with some 
substantial Truth, a secret from which he is excluded, which evades him 
ad infinitum - the inaccessible heart of the Law beyond the infinite series 
of doors; the unattainable last answer, the last secret of how the Jews 
extract money from us, awaiting us at the end ofthe Jew’s narration (which 
could go on ad infinitum). And the solution is the same in both cases: the 
subject has to grasp how, from the very start of the game, the door conceal- 
ing the secret was meant only for him, how the real secret at the end of 
the Jew’s narration is his own desire - in short, how his external position 
vis-a-vis the Other (the fact that he experiences himself as excluded from 
the secret of the Other) is internal to the Other itself Here we encounter 
a kind of ‘reflexivity’ which cannot be reduced to philosophical reflection: 
the very feature which seems to exclude the subject from the Other (his 


6 Kafka, The Trial, p. 237. 



FROM SYMPTOM TO SINTHOME 71 


desire to penetrate the secret o f the Other - the secret of the Law, the secret 
of how the Jews ... J is already a 'reflexive determination’ of the Other; 
precisely as excluded from the Other, we are already part of its game. 


A time trap 

The positivity proper to the misrecognition - the fact that the misrecognition 
functions as a ‘productive’ instance - is to be conceived in an even more radical 
way: not only is the misrecognition an immanent condition of the final 
advent of the truth, but it already possesses in itself, so to speak, a positive 
ontological dimension: it founds, it renders possible a certain positive entity. 
To exemplify this let us refer again to science fiction, to one of the classic 
science-fiction novels, The Door into Summerby Robert A. Heinlein. 

The hypothesis of this novel (written in 1957) is that in 15170 hibernation 
has become an ordinary procedure, managed by numerous agencies. The 
hero, a young engineer by the name of Daniel Boone Davis, hibernates 
himself as a professional deception for thirty years. After his awakening 
in December 2000, he encounters - among other adventures - the old Dr 
Twitched, a kind of ‘mad genius’ who has constructed a time machine; 
Davis persuades DrTwitchell to use this machine on him and to transpose 
him back into the year 1970. There our hero arranges his affairs (by invest- 
ing his money in a company that he knows, from his voyage to 2000, will 
be a great success in thirty years’ time, and even by arranging for his own 
wedding in 2000: he organizes also the hibernation of his future bride) 
and then hibernates himself again for thirty years; the date of his second 
awakening is 27 April 2001. 

This way, all ends well - there is just one small detail annoying the 
hero: i n the year 2000, the newspapers publish, beside ‘Births’, ‘Deaths’ and 
‘Marriages’, also the column ‘Awakenings’, listing the names of all persons 
roused from hibernation. His first stay in the years 2000 and 2001 lasted 
from December 2000 until June 2001; this means that Doc Twitched has 
transposed him back to the past after the date of his second awakening in 
April 2001. In The Times for Saturday 28 April 2001, there was of course his 



72 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 

name in the list of those awakened on Friday 27 April: ‘D. B. Davis’. Why 
did he, during his first stay in 2001, miss his own name among the 
‘Awakenings’, although he was all the time a very attentive reader of this 
column? Was this an accidental oversight? 

But what would I have done if I had seen it? Gone there, met myself - 
and gone stark mad? No, for ifl had seen it, I would not have done the 
things I did afterward - ‘afterward’ for me - which led up to it. Therefore 
it could never have happened that way. The control is a negative feedback 
type, with a built-in ‘fail safe’, because the very existence of that line of 
print depended on my not seeing it; the apparent possibility that I might 
have seen it is one of the excluded ‘not possibles’ on the basic circuit 
design. ‘There’s a divinity that shapes our ends, rough-hew them how 
we will.’ Free will and predestination in one sentence and both true. 7 

Here we have the literal definition of the ‘agency of the letter in the uncon- 
scious’: the line ‘the very existence of [which] depended on my not seeing 
it’. If during his first stay in 2001, the subject had perceived his own name 
in the newspaper - if he had perceived during his first stay the trace of 
his second stay in 2001 - he would have acted thereupon in a different 
manner (he would not have travelled back into the past, and so on): that 
is, he would have acted in a way that woul dhave prevented his name from appearing 
in the newspaper. The oversight itself therefore has, so to speak, a negative 
ontological dimension: it is the ‘condition of the possibility’ of the letter 
that it must be overlooked, that we must not take notice of it - its very 
existence depends on its not being seen by the subject. Here we have a 
kind of inversion of the traditional esse - percipi: it is the non-percipi which 
is the condition of esse. This is perhaps the right way to conceive the ‘pre- 
ontological’ status of the unconscious (evoked by Lacan in his Seminar XI): 
the unconscious is a paradoxical letter which insists only in so far as it does 
not exist ontologically. 


7 Robert A. Heinlein, The Door into Summer, New York: Del Ray, 1986, p. 287. 



FROM SYMPTOM TO SINTHOM E 


73 


In a homologous way, we could also determine the status of knowledge 
in psychoanalysis. The knowledge at work here is knowledge concerning 
the most intimate, traumatic being of the subject, knowledge about the 
particular logic of his enjoyment. In his everyday attitude, the subject 
refers to the objects of his Umwelc, of the world that surrounds him, as to 
some given positivity; psychoanalysis brings about a dizzy experience of 
how this given positivity exists and retains its consistency only in so far 
as somewhere else (on another scene, an einem anderen Schauplacz) some 
fundamental non-knowledge insists - it brings about the terrifying expe- 
rience that if we come to know too much, we may lose our very being. 

Let us take, for example, the Lacanian notion of the imaginary self: this 
self exists only on the basis of the misrecognition of its own conditions; 
it is the effect of this misrecognition. So Lacan’s emphasis is not on the 
supposed incapacity of the self to reflect, to grasp its own conditions - on 
its being the plaything of inaccessible unconscious forces: his point is that 
the subject can pay for such a reflection with the loss of his very ontological 
consistency. It is in this sense that the knowledge which we approach 
through psychoanalysis is impossible-real: we are on dangerous ground; 
in getting too close to it we observe suddenly how our consistency, our 
positivity, is dissolving itself 

In psychoanalysis, knowledge is marked by a lethal dimension: the 
subject must pay the approach to it with his own being. In other words, 
to abolish the misrecognition means at the same time to abolish, to 
dissolve, the ‘substance’ which was supposed to hide itself behind the 
form-illusion ofmisrecognition. This ‘substance’ - the only one recognized 
in psychoanalysis - is, according to Lacan, enjoyment \jouissance}: access to 
knowledge is then paid with the loss of enjoyment - enjoyment, in its 
stupidity, is possible only on the basis ofcertain non-knowledge, ignorance. 
No wonder, then, that the reaction of the analysand to the analyst is often 
paranoid: by driving him towards knowledge about his desire, the analyst 
wants effectively to steal from him his most intimate treasure, the kernel 
ofhis enjoyment. 



74 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


Symptom as Real 


The Titanic as symptom 

This dialectics of overtaking ourselves towards the future and simultaneous 
retroactive modification of the past - dialectics by which the error is inter- 
nal to the truth, by which the misrecognition possesses a positive onto- 
logical dimension - has, however, its limits; it stumbles on to a rock upon 
which it becomes suspended. This rock is of course the Real, that which 
resists symbolization: the traumatic point which is always missed but 
none the less always returns, although we try - through a set of different 
strategies - to neutralize it, to integrate it into the symbolic order. In the 
perspective of the last stage ofLacanian teaching, it is precisely the symp- 
tom which is conceived as such a real kernel of enjoyment, which persists 
as a surplus and returns through all attempts to domesticate it, to gentrify 
it (if we may be permitted to use this term adapted to designate strategies 
to domesticate the slums as ‘symptoms’ of our cities), to dissolve it by 
means of explication, of putting-into-words its meaning. 

To exemplify this shift of emphasis in the concept of symptom in 
Lacan’s teaching, let us take a case which is today again attracting public 
attention: the wreck of the Titanic. Of course, it is already a commonplace 
to read Titanica.s a symptom in the sense of'knot of meanings’: the sinking 
of the Titanic had a traumatic effect, it was a shock, ‘the impossible 
happened’, the unsinkable ship had sunk; but the point is that precisely 
as a shock, this sinking arrived at its proper time - ‘the time was waiting 
for it’: even before it actually happened, there was already a place opened, 
reserved for it in fantasy-space. It had such a terrific impact on the 'social 
imaginary’ by virtue of the fact that it was expected. It was foretold in 
amazing detail: 


In 185)8 a struggling author named Morgan Robertson concocted a 
novel about a fabulous Atlantic liner, far larger than any that had ever 
been built. Robertson loaded his ship with rich and complacent people 



FROM SYMPTOM TO SINTHOME 


75 


and then wrecked it one cold April night on an iceberg. This some- 
how showed the futility of everything, and in fact, the book was 
called Futility when it appeared that year, published by the firm of 
M. F. Mansfield. 

Fourteen years later a British shipping company named the White 
Star Line built a steamer remarkably like the one in Robertson’s novel. 
The new liner was 66,000 tons displacement; Robertson’s was 70,000. 
The real ship was 882.5 feet long; the fictional one was 800 feet. Both 
vessels were triple screw and could make 24-25 knots. Both could carry 
about 3,000 people, and both had enough lifeboats for only a fraction 
of this number. But, then, this did not seem to matter because both 
were labeled ‘unsinkable’. 

On April 10, 1912, the real ship left Southampton on her maiden 
voyage to New York. Her cargo included a priceless copy of the Rubaiyat 
ofOmar Khayyam and a list of passengers collectively worth two hundred 
and fifty million dollars. On her way over she too struck an iceberg 
and went down on a cold April night. 

Robertson called his ship the Titan; the White Star Line called its 
ship the Titanic 

The reasons, the background for this incredible coincidence, ate not diffi- 
cult to guess: at the turn of the century, it was already part of the Zeitgeist 
that a certain age was coming to an end - the age of peaceful progress, of 
well-defined and stable class distinctions, and so on: that is, the long period 
from 1850 until the First World War. New dangers were hanging in the 
air (labour movements, eruptions of nationalism, anti-Semitism, the 
danger of war) which would soon tarnish the idyllic image of Western 
civilization, releasing its ‘barbaric’ potentials. And if there was a phenom- 
enon which, at the turn of the century, embodied the end of this age, it 
was the great transatlantic liners: floating palaces, wonders of technical 
progress; incredibly complicated and well-functioning machines, and at 

8 Walter Lord, A Night to Remember, New York: Bantam, 1983, pp. xi xii. ' 



76 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


the same time the meeting-place of the cream of society; a kind of micro- 
cosm of the social structure, an image of society not as it really was but 
seen as society wanted to be seen in order to appear likeable, as a stable 
totality with well-defined class distinctions, and so on - in brief: the 
ego-ideal of society. 

In other words, the wreck of the Titanic made such a tremendous 
impact not because of the immediate material dimensions of the 
catastrophe but because of its symbolic overdetermination, because of the 
ideological meaning invested in it: it was read as a 'symbol', as a condensed, 
metaphorical representation of the approaching catastrophe of Euro- 
pean civilization itself The wreck of the Titanic was a form in which 
society lived the experience of its own death, and it is interesting to note 
how both the traditional rightist and leftist readings retain this same 
perspective, with only shifts ofemphasis. From the traditional perspective, 
the Titanic is a nostalgic monument of a bygone era of gallantry lost in 
today’s world of vulgarity; from the leftist viewpoint, it is a story about 
the impotence of an ossified class society. 

But all these are commonplaces that could be found in any report on 
the Titanic - we can easily explain, in this way, the metaphorical over- 
determination which confers on the Titanic its symbolic weight. The 
problem is that this is not all. We can easily convince ourselves of this 
by looking at the photos of the wreck of the Titanic taken recently by 
undersea cameras - where lies the terrifying power of fascination exercised 
by these pictures? It is, so to speak, intuitively clear that this fascinating 
power cannot be explained by the symbolic over determination, by the 
metaphorical meaning of the Titanic, its last resort is not that of 
representation but that of a certain inert presence. The Titanic is a Thing 
in the Lacanian sense: the material leftover, the materialization of the 
terrifying, impossible jouissance. By looking at the wreck we gain an insight 
into the forbidden domain, into a space that should be left unseen: visible 
fragments are a kind of coagulated remnant of the liquid flux of jouissance, 
a kind of petrified forest of enjoyment. 

This terrifying impact has nothing to do with meaning - or, more 



FROM SYMPTOM TO SINTHOME 


77 


precisely, it is a meaning permeated with enjoyment, a Lacanian yims- 
sense. lhe wreck of the Titanic therefore functions as a sublime object: a 
positive, material object elevated to the status of the impossible Thing. 
And perhaps all the effort to articulate the metaphorical meaning of the 
Titanic is nothing but an attempt to escape this terrifying impact of the 
Thing, an attempt to domesticate the Thing by reducing it to its symbolic 
status, by providing it with a meaning. We usually say that the fascinating 
presence of a Thing obscures its meaning; here, the opposite is true: the 
meaning obscures the terrifying impact of its presence. 


From symptom rosinthome 

This, then, is the symptom - and it is on the basis of this notion of the 
symptom that we must locate the fact that in the final years of Lacan’s 
teaching we find a kind of universalization of the symptom: almost every- 
thing that is becomes in a way symptom, so that finally even woman is 
determined as the symptom of man. We can even say that ‘symptom’ is 
Lacan’s final answer to the eternal philosophical question ‘Why is there 
something instead of nothing?’ - this ‘something’ which ‘is’ instead of 
nothing is indeed the symptom. 

The general reference of the philosophical discussion is usually the 
triangle world - language-subject, the relation of the subject to the world 
of objects, mediated through language; Lacan is usually reproached for 
his 'absolutism of the signifier’ - the reproach is that he does not take 
into account the objective world, that he limits his theory to the interplay 
of subject and language; as if the objective world does not exist, as ifit is 
only the imaginary effect-illusion of the signifier’s play. But Lacan’s answer 
to this reproach is that not only does the world - as a given whole of 
objects - not exist, but that neither do language and subject exist: it is 
already a classic Lacanian thesis that ‘the big Other [that is, the symbolic 
order as a consistent, closed totality] does not exist’, and the subject is 
denoted by?, the crossed, blocked S, a void, an empty place in the signifier’s 


structure. 



78 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


At this point we must of course ask ourselves the naive but necessary 
question: if the world and language and subject do not exist, what does 
exist; more precisely: what confers on existing phenomena their consis- 
tency? Lacan’s answer is, as we have already indicated, symptom. To this 
answer, we must give its whole anti-post-structuralist emphasis: the 
fundamental gesture of post-structuralism is to deconstruct every 
substantial identity, to denounce behind its solid consistency an interplay 
of symbolic overdetermination - briefly, to dissolve the substantial identity 
into a network of non-substantial, differential relations; the notion of 
symptom is the necessary counterpoint to it, the substance of enjoyment, 
the real kernel around which this signifying interplay is structured. 

To seize the logic ofthis universalization ofsymptom, we must connect 
it with another universalization, that of foreclosure ( Verwerfung ). In his 
unpublished Seminar, J.-A. Miller ironically spoke of the passage from 
special to general theory of foreclosure (alluding, of course, to Einstein’s 
passage from special to general theory of relativity). When Lacan introduced 
the notion of foreclosure in the 15150s, it designated a specific phenomenon 
of the exclusion of a certain key-signifler [point de capiton, Name-of-the- 
Father) from the symbolic order, triggering the psychotic process; here, 
the foreclosure is not proper to language as such but a distinctive feature 
of the psychotic phenomena. And, as Lacan reformulated Freud, what was 
foreclosed from the Symbolic returns in the Real - in the form of hallu- 
cinatory phenomena, for example. 

However, in the last years of his teaching Lacan gave universal range 
to this function of foreclosure: there is a certain foreclosure proper to the 
order of signifier as such; whenever we have a symbolic structure it is 
structured around a certain void, it implies the foreclosure of a certain 
key-signifier. The symbolic structuring of sexuality implies the lack of 1 
signifier of the sexual relationship, it implies that ‘there is no sexual rela- 
tionship’, that the sexual relation cannot be symbolized - that it is an 
impossible, ‘antagonistic’ relationship. And to seize the interconnection 
between the two universalizations, we must simply again apply the propo- 
sition ‘what was foreclosed from the Symbolic returns in the Real of the 



FROM SYMPTOM TO SINTHOME 79 


symptom’: woman does not exist, her signifier is originally foreclosed, and 
that is why she returns as a symptom of man. 

Symptom as real - this seems directly opposed to the classic Lacanian 
thesis that the unconscious is structured like a language: is not the symp- 
tom a symbolic formation par excellence, a cyphered, coded message which 
can be dissolved through interpretation because it is already in itself a 
signifier? Is not the whole point of Lacan that we must detect, behind the 
corporeal-imaginary mask (for example, of a hysterical symptom), its 
symbolic overdetermination? To explain this apparent contradiction, we 
must take into account the different stages of Lacan’s development. 

We can use the concept of symptom as a kind of clue, or index, alio wing 
us to differentiate the main stages of Lacan’s theoretical development. At 
the beginning, in the early 1950s, a symptom was conceived as a symbolic, 
signifying formation, as a kind of cypher, a coded message addressed to 
the big Other which later was supposed to confer on it its true meaning. 
The symptom arises where the world failed, where the circuit of the 
symbolic communication was broken: it is a kind of ‘prolongation of the 
communication by other means’; the failed, repressed word articulates 
itselfin acoded, cyphered form. The implication ofthis is that the symptom 
can not only be interpreted but is, so to speak, already formed with an eye 
to its interpretation: it is addressed to the big Other presumed to contain 
its meaning. In other words, there is no symptom without its addressee: 
in the psychoanalytic cure the symptom is always addressed to the analyst, 
it is an appeal to him to deliver its hidden meaning. We can also say that 
there is no symptom without transference, without the position of some 
subject presumed to know its meaning. Precisely as an enigma, the symp- 
tom, so to speak, announces its dissolution through interpretation: the 
aim of psychoanalysis is to re-establish the broken network of communi- 
cation by allowing the patient to verbalize the meaning of his symptom: 
through this verbalization, the symptom is automatically dissolved. This, 
then, is the basic point: in its very constitution, the symptom implies the 
field of the big Other as consistent, complete, because its very formation 
is an appeal to the Other which contains its meaning. 



80 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


But here the problems began: why, in spite of its interpretation, does 
the symptom not dissolve itself; why does it persist? The Lacanian answer 
is, of course, enjoyment. The symptom is not only a cyphered message, it 
is at the same time a way for the subject to organize his enjoyment - that 
is why, even after the completed interpretation, the subject is not prepared 
to renounce his symptom; that is why he ‘loves his symptom more than 
himself. In locating this dimension of enjoyment in the symptom, Lacan 
proceeded in two stages. 

First, he tried to isolate this dimension of enjoyment as that of fantasy, 
and to oppose symptom and fantasy through a whole set of distinctive 
features: symptom is a signifying formation which, so to speak, ‘overtakes 
itself towards its interpretation - that is, which can be analysed; fantasy 
is an inert construction which cannot be analysed, which resists interpre- 
tation. Symptom implies and addresses some non-barred, consistent big 
Other which will retroactively confer on it its meaning; fantasy implies a 
crossed-out, blocked, barred, non-whole, inconsistent Other - that is to 
say, it is filling out a void in the Other. Symptom (for example, a slip of 
the tongue) causes discomfort and displeasure when it occurs, but we 
embrace its interpretation with pleasure; we explain gladly to others the 
meaning of our slips; their ‘intersubjective recognition’ is usually a source 
of intellectual satisfaction. When we abandon ourselves to fantasy (for 
example, in daydreaming) we feel immense pleasure, but on the contrary 
it causes us great discomfort and shame to confess our fantasies to others. 

In this way we can also articulate two stages of the psychoanalytic 
process: interpretation of symptoms - going through fantasy. When we are 
confronted with the patient’s symptoms, we must first interpret them 
and penetrate through them to the fundamental fantasy as the kernel of 
enjoyment which is blocking the further movement of interpretation; 
then we must accomplish the crucial step of going through the fantasy, 
of obtaining distance from it, of experiencing how the fantasy-formation 
just masks, fills out a certain void, lack, empty place in the Other. 

But here again another problem arose: how do we account for patients 
who have, beyond any doubt, gone through their fantasy, who have 



FROM SYMPTOM TO SINTHOME 


81 


obtained distance from the fantasy-framework of their reality, but whose 
key symptom still persists? How do we explain this fact? What do we do 
with a symptom, with this pathological formation which persists notonly 
beyond its interpretation but even beyond fantasy? Lacan tried to answer 
this challenge with the concept of sinthome, a neologism containing a set 
of associations (synthetic-artificial man, synthesis between symptom and 
fantasy, Saint Thomas, the saint ...).’ Symptom as sinthome is a certain 
signifying formation penetrated with enjoyment: it is a signifier as a bearer 
of jouis-sense, enjoyment-in-sense. 

What we must bear in mind here is the radical ontological status of 
symptom: symptom, conceived as sinthome, is literally our only substance, 
the only positive support ofour being, the only point that gives consistency 
to the subject. In other words, symptom is the way we - the subjects - 
‘avoid madness’, the way we ‘choose something (the symptom-formation) 
instead of nothing (radical psychotic autism, the destruction of the 
symbolic universe)’ through the binding of our enjoyment to a certain 
signifying, symbolic formation which assures a minimum of consistency 
to our being-in-the-world. 

Ifthe symptom in this radical dimension is unbound, it means literally 
‘the end of the world’ - the only alternative to the symptom is nothing: 
pure autism, a psychic suicide, surrender to the death drive, even to the 
total destruction of the symbolic universe. That is why the final Lacanian 
definition of the end of the psychoanalytic process is identification with the 
symptom. The analysis achieves its end when the patient is able to recognize, 
in the Real of his symptom, the only support of his being. That is how 
we must read Freud’s wo es war, soli ich werden: you, the subject, must 
identify yourself with the place where your symptom already was; in its 
‘pathological’ particularity you must recognize the element which gives 
consistency to your being. 

This, then, is a symptom: a particular, ‘pathological’, signifying forma- 
tion, a binding of enjoyment, an inert stain resisting communication and 


9 Jacques Lacan, 'Joyce le sympeome’, in Joyce avec Lacan, Paris: Navarin Editeur, 1987. 



82 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


interpretation, a stain which cannot be included in the circuit ofdiscourse, 
of social bond network, but is at the same time a positive condition of it. 
Now it is perhaps clear why woman is, according to Lacan, a symptom of 
man - to explain this, we need only remember the well-known male 
chauvinist wisdom often referred to by Freud: women are impossible to 
bear, a source of eternal nuisance, but still, they are the best thing we have 
of their kind; without them, it would be even worse. So if woman does 
not exist, man is perhaps simply a woman who thinks that she does exist. 


'Inyou more thanyourself 

In so far as the sinthome is a certain signifier which is not enchained in a 
network but immediately filled, penetrated with enjoyment, its status is by 
definition ‘psychosomatic’, that of a terrifying bodily mark which is merely 
a mute attestation bearing witness to a disgusting enjoyment, without repre- 
senting anything or anyone. Is not Franz Kafka’s story ‘A Country Doctor’ 
therefore the story of a sinthome in its pure - distilled, so to speak - form? The 
open wound growing luxuriantly on the child’s body, this nauseous, 
verminous aperture - what is it if not the embodiment of vitality as such, of 
the life-substance in its most radical dimension of meaningless enjoyment? 

In his right side, near the hip, was an open wound as big as the palm of 
my hand. Rose-red, in many variations of shade, darkin the grooves, lighter 
at the edges, softly granulated, with irregular clots of blood, open as a 
surface-mine to the daylight. That was how it looked from a distance. But 
on a closer inspection there was another complication. I could not help a 
low whistle of surprise. Worms, as thick and as long as my little finger, 
themselves rose-red and blood-spotted as well, were wriggling from their 
fastness in the interior of the wound towards the light, with small white 
heads and many little legs. Poor young man, he was past helping. I had 
discovered his great wound; this blossom in his side was destroying him.'" 

10 Franz Kafka, Wedding Preparations in the Country and Other Stories, Harmondsworth: 
Penguin, 1978, p. 122. 



FROM SYMPTOM TO SINTHOME 83 


'In his right side, near the hips . . . ’ - exactly like Christ’s wound, although 
its closest forerunner is the suffering of Amfortas in Wagner’s Parsifal. 
Amfortas’s problem is that as long as his wound bleeds he cannot die, he 
cannot find peace in death; his attendants insist that he must do his duty 
and perform the Grail’s ritual, regardless of his suffering, while he desperately 
asks them to have mercy on him and put an end to his suffering by simply 
killing him - exactly like the child in ‘A Country Doctor’, who addresses the 
narrator-doctor with the desperate request: ‘Doctor, let me die’. 

At first sight, Wagner and Kafka are as far apart as they can be: on one 
hand, we have the late-Romantic revival of a medieval legend; on the other, 
the description of the fate of the individual in contemporary totalitarian 
bureaucracy . . . but if we look closely we perceive that the fundamental 
problem of Parsifal is eminently a bureaucratic one: the incapacity, the 
incompetence of Amfortas in performing his ritual-bureaucratic duty. The 
terrifying voice of Amfortas’s father Titurel, this superego-injunction of 
the living dead, addresses his impotent son in the first act with the words: 
'Mein Sohn Amfortas, bist du am Amt?’, to which we have to give all 
bureaucratic weight: Are you at your post? Are you ready to officiate? In 
a somewhat perfunctory sociological manner, we could say that Wagner’s 
Parsifal is staging the historical fact that the classical Master (Amfortas) is 
no longer capable of reigning in the conditions of totalitarian bureaucracy 
and that he must be replaced by a new figure of a Leader (Parsifal). 

In his film version of Parsifal, Hans-Jiirgen Syberberg demonstrated 
by a series of changes to Wagner’s original - that he was well aware of this 
fact. First there is his manipulation of the sexual difference: at the crucial 
moment of inversion in the second act - after Kundry’s kiss - Parsifal 
changes his sex: the male actor is replaced by a young, cold female; what 
is at stake here is no ideology of hermaphroditism but a shrewd insight 
into the ‘feminine’ nature of totalitarian power, totalitarian Law is an 
obscene Law, penetrated by enjoyment, a Law which has lost its formal 
neutrality. But what is crucial for us here is another feature ofSyberberg’s 
version: the fact that he has externalized Amfortas’s wound - it is carried 
on a pillow beside him, as a nauseous partial object out of which, through 



84 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


an aperture resembling vaginal lips, trickles blood. Here we have the 
contiguity with Kafka: it is as if the child’s wound from ‘A Country Doctor’ 
has externalized itself, becoming a separate object, gaining independent 
existence or - to use Lacan’s style - ex-sistence. That is why Syberberg 
stages the scene where, just before the final denouement, Amfortas 
desperately begs his attendants to run their swords through his body and 
so relieve him of his unbearable torments, in a way which differs radically 
from the customary way: 

Already I feel the darkness of death enshroud me, 
and must I yet again return to life? 

Madmen! Who would force me to live? 

Could you but grant me death! 

(He tears open his garment. ] 

Here I am - here is the open wound! 

Here flows my blood, that poisons me. 

Draw your weapons! Plunge your swords 
in deep - deep, up to the hilt! 

The wound is Amfortas’s symptom - it embodies his filthy, nauseous enjoy- 
ment, it is his thickened, condensed life-substance which does not let him 
die. His words ‘Here I am - here is the open wound!’ are thus to be taken 
literally: all his being is in this wound; if we annihilate it, he himself will 
lose his positive ontological consistency and cease to exist. This scene is usually 
staged in accordance with Wagner’s instructions: Amfortas tears open his 
garment and points at the bleeding wound on his body; with Syberberg, 
who has eternalized the wound, Amfortas points at the nauseous partial 
object outside himself- that is, he does not point back at himself but there 
outside, in the sense of ‘there outside I am, in that disgusting piece of the 
real consists all my substance!’ How should we read this externality? 

The first, most obvious solution is to conceive this wound as a symbolic 
one: the wound is externalized to show that it does not concern the body 
as such but the symbolic network into which the body is caught. To put 



FROM SYMPTOM TO SINTHOME 


85 


it simply: the real reason for Amfortas’s impotence, and therewith for the 
decay of his kingdom, is a certain blockage, a certain snag in the network 
of symbolic relations. ‘Something is rotten’ in this country where the ruler 
has trespassed a fundamental prohibition (he allowed himself to be seduced 
by Kundry); the wound is then just a materialization of a moral-symbolic 
decay. 

But there is another, perhaps more radical reading: in so far as it sticks 
out from the (symbolic and symbolized) reality of the body, the wound is 
‘a little piece of real’, a disgusting protuberance which cannot be integrated 
into the totality of ‘our own body’, a materialization of that which is 'in 
Amfortas more than Amfortas’ and is thereby - according to the classic 
Lacanian formula - destroying him . 11 It is destroying him, but at the same 
time it is the only thing which gives him consistency. This is the paradox 
of the psychoanalytic concept of the symptom: symptom is an element 
clinging on like a kind of parasite and ‘spoiling the game', but if we anni- 
hilate it things get even worse: we lose all we had - even the rest which 
was threatened but not yet destroyed by the symptom. Confronted with 
the symptom we are always in a position ofan impossible choice; illustrated 
by a well-known joke about the chiefeditor of one of Hearst’s newspapers: 
in spite of persuasion from Hearst, he did not want to take well-deserved 
leave. When Hearst asked him why he did not want to go on his holidays, 
the editor’s answer was: ‘I am afraid that if I were absent for a couple of 
weeks, the sales of the newspaper would fall; but I am even more afraid 
that in spite of my absence, the sales would not fall!' This is the symptom: 
an element which causes a great deal of trouble, but its absence would 
mean even greater trouble: total catastrophe. 

To take, as a final example, Ridley Scott’s film Alien, is not the disgusting 
parasite which jumps out of the body of poor John Hurt precisely such a 
symptom, is not its status precisely the same as that of Amfortas’s external- 
ized wound? The cave on the desert planet into which the space travellers 
enter when the computer registers signs of life in it, and where the 

11 Lacan, The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psycho Analysis, Chapter 10. 



86 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


polyp-like parasite sticks on to Hurt's face, has the status of the pre- 
symbolic Thing - that is, of the maternal body, of the living substance of 
enjoyment. The utero-vaginal associations aroused by this cave are almost 
too intrusive. The parasite adhering to Hurt’s face is thus a kind of a 
‘sprout of enjoyment’, a leftover of the maternal Thing which then 
functions as a symptom - the Real of enjoyment - of the group marooned 
in the wandering spaceship: it threatens them and at the same time 
constitutes them as a closed group. The fact that this parasitical object 
incessantly changes its form merely confirms its anamorphic status: it is a 
pure being of semblance. The ‘alien’, the eighth, supplementary passenger, 
is an object which, being nothing at all in itself, must none the less be 
added, annexed as an anamorphic surplus. It is the Real at its purest: a 
semblance, something which on a strictly symbolic level does not exist at 
all but at the same time the only thing in the whole film which actually 
exists, the thing against which the whole reality is utterly defenceless. 
One has only to remember the spine-chilling scene when the liquid pour- 
ing from the polyp-like parasite after the doctor makes an incision with 
a scalpel dissolves the metal floor of the space ship . . . 

From this perspective of sinchome, truth and enjoyment are radically 
incompatible: the dimension of truth is opened through our mis- 
recognition of the traumatic Thing, embodying the impossible jouissance. 


Ideological jonissance 

With the designation of an inconsistency of the socio-symbolic Other, the 
positive side of which is obscene enjoyment, have we not consented also 
to the usual ‘postmodernist’ anti-Enlightenment ressentiment? The text on 
the cover of the French edition of Lacan’s Ecrics already belies such an 
understanding: Lacan conceives there his theoretical eff ort explicidy as a 
prolongation of the old struggle of Enlightenment. The Lacanian criticism 
of the autonomous subject and his power of reflection, of reflexive appro- 
priation of his objective condition, is therefore far from any affirmation of 
some irrational ground escaping the reach of reason. Paraphrasing the 



FROM SYMPTOM TO SINTHOM £ 87 


well-known Marxian formula of capital itself as the limit of capitalism, 
we should say that according to Lacan the limit of Enlightenment is 
Enlightenment itself, its usually forgotten obverse already articulated in 
Descartes and Kant. 

The leading motif of the Enlightenment is, of course, some variation 
oftheinjunction'Reason autonomously!’: ‘Useyourownhead,freeyourself 
of all prejudices, do not accept anything without questioning its rational 
foundations, always preserve a critical distance . . . But Kant had already, 
in his famous article ‘What is Enlightenment?’, added to this an unpleas- 
ant, disquieting supplement, introducing a certain fissure into the very 
heart of the Enlightenment project: ‘Reason about whatever you want and 
as much as you want - but obey !’ That is to say: as the autonomous subject 
of theoretical reflection, addressing the enlightened public, you can think 
freely, you can question all authority; but as a part of the social ‘machine’, 
as a subject in the other meaning of the word, you must obey uncondi- 
tionally the orders of your superiors. This fissure is proper to the project 
of Enlightenment as such: we find it already with Descartes, in his Discourse 
on Method. The obverse of the cogito doubting everything, questioning the 
very existence of the world, is the Cartesian ‘provisional morality’, a set 
of rules established by Descartes to enable him to survive in the everyday 
existence of his philosophical journey: the very first rule emphasizes the 
need to accept and obey the customs and laws of the country into which 
we were born without questioning their authority. 

The main point is to perceive how this acceptance of given empirical, 
‘pathological’ (Kant) customs and rules is not some kind of pre- 
Enlightenment remnant - a remnant of the traditional authoritarian 
attitude - but, on the contrary, the necessary obverse of the Enlightenment itself : 
through this acceptance of the customs and rules of social life in their 
nonsensical, given character, through acceptance of the fact that ‘Law is 
law’, we are internally freed from its constraints - the way is open for free 
theoretical reflection. In other words, we render unto Caesar what is 
Caesar’s, so that we can calmly reflect on everything. This experience of 
the given, non-founded character of customs and social rules entails in 



88 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


itself a kind of distance from them. In the traditional, pre-enlightened 
universe, the authority of the Law is never experienced as nonsensical and 
unfounded; on the contrary, the Law is always illuminated by the 
charismatic power of fascination. Only to the already enlightened view 
does the universe of social customs and rule appear as a nonsensical 
‘machine’ that must be accepted as such. 

Ofcourse, we could say that the principal illusion of the Enlightenment 
consists in the idea that we can preserve a simple distance from the external 
‘machine’ of social customs and thus keep the space of our inner reflection 
spotless, unblemished by the externality of customs. But this criticism 
does not affect Kant in so far as in his affirmation of the categorical imper- 
ative he has taken into account the traumatic, truth-less, non-sensical 
character of the internal, moral Law itself The Kantian categorical imper- 
ative is precisely a Law which has a necessary, unconditional authority, 
without being true: it is - in Kant’s own words - a kind of ‘transcendental 
fact’, a given fact the truth of which cannot be theoretically demonstrated; 
but its unconditional validity should nonetheless be presupposed for 
our moral activity to have any sense. 

We can contrast this moral Law and the ‘pathological’, empirically 
given social laws through a whole set of distinctive features: social laws 
structure a field of social reality, moral Law is the Real of an unconditional 
imperative which takes no consideration of the limitations imposed on 
us by reality - it is an impossible injunction. ‘You can, because you must! 
[Du kannst, denti du sollst.l]’; social laws pacify our egotism and regulate 
social homeostasis; moral Law creates imbalance in this homeostasis by 
introducing an element of unconditional compulsion. The ultimate para- 
dox of Kant is this priority of practical over theoretical reason: we can free 
ourselves of external social constraints and achieve the maturity proper 
to the autonomous enlightened subject precisely by submitting to the 
‘irrational’ compulsion of the categorical imperative. 

It is a commonplace of Lacanian theory to emphasize how this Kantian 
moral imperative conceals an obscene superego injunction: ‘Enjoy!’ - the 
voice of the Other impelling us to follow our duty for the sake of duty is 



FROM SYMPTOM TO S INTHOME 89 


a traumatic irruption of an appeal to impossible jouissance, disrupting the 
homeostasis of the pleasure principle and its prolongation, the reality p rin- 
ciple. This is why Lacan conceives Sade as the truth of Kant: 'Kant avec 
Sade’W But in what precisely does this obscenity of the moral Law consist? 
Not in some remnants, leftovers of the empirical ‘pathological’ contents 
sticking to the pure form of the Law and smudging it, but in thisfonn itself. 
The moral Law is obscene in so far as it is its form itself which functions 
as a motivating force driving us to obey its command - that is, in so far 
as we obey moral Law because it is law and not because of a set of positive 
reasons: the obscenity of moral Law is the obverse of its formal character. 

Of course, the elementary feature of Kant’s ethics is to exclude all 
empirical, ‘pathological’ contents - in other words, all objects producing 
pleasure (or displeasure) - as the locus of our moral activity, but what 
remains hidden in Kant is the way this renunciation itself produces a 
certain surplus-enjoyment (the Lacanian plus-de-jouit). Let us take the case 
of Fascism - the Fascist ideology is based upon a purely formal imperative: 
Obey, because you must! In other words, renounce enjoyment, sacrifice 
yourself and do not ask about the meaning of it - the value of the sacrifice 
lies in its very meaninglessness; true sacrifice is for its own end; you must 
find positive fulfilment in the sacrifice itself, not in its instrumental value: 
it is this renunciation, this giving up of enjoyment itself, which produces 
a certain surplus-enjoyment. 

This surplus produced through renunciation is the Lacanian objet petit 
a, the embodiment of surplus-enjoyment; here we can also grasp why 
Lacan coined the notion of surplus-enjoyment on the model of the Marxian 
notion of surplus-value - with Marx, surplus-value also implies a certain 
renunciation of'pathological’, empirical use-value. And Fascism is obscene 
in so far as it perceives directly the ideological form as its own end, as an 
end in itself- remember Mussolini’s famous answer to the question ‘How 
do the Fascists justify their claim to rule Italy? What is their programme?’ 
'Our programme is very simple: we want to rule Italy!’ The ideological 


12 jacques Lacan, Ecrits, Paris: Seuil, 1966. 



90 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


power of Fascism lies precisely in the feature which was perceived by liberal 
or leftist critics as its greatest weakness: in the utterly void, formal character 
of its appeal, in the fact that it demands obedience and sacrifice for their 
own sake. For Fascist ideology, the point is not the instrumental value of 
the sacrifice, it is the very form of sacrifice itself ‘the spirit of sacrifice’, 
which is the cure against the liberal-decadent disease. It is also clear why 
Fascism was so terrified by psychoanalysis: psychoanalysis enables us to 
locate an obscene enjoyment at work in this act of formal sacrifice. 

This is the hidden perverse, obscene dimension of Kantian moral 
formalism finally appearing in Fascism: it is here that Kantian formalism 
rejoins - or, more precisely, explicates - the logic ofthe second ofDescartes’s 
maxims of provisional morality: 

. . . that of being as firm and resolute in my actions as I could be, and 
not to follow less faithfully opinions the most dubious, when my mind 
was once made up regarding them, than if these had been beyond 
doubt. In this I should be following the example of travellers, who, 
finding themselves lost in a forest, know that they ought not to wander 
first to one side and then to the other, nor, still less, to stop in one 
place, but understand that they should continue to walk as straight as 
they can in one direction, not diverging for any slight reason, even 
though it was possibly chance alone that first determined them in 
their choice. By this means if they do not go exactly where they wish, 
they will at least arrive somewhere at the end, where probably they 
will be better off than in the middle of a forest . 13 

In this passage, Descartes is in a way revealing the hidden cards of ideology 
as such: the real aim of ideology is the attitude demanded by it, the consis- 
tency of the ideological form, the fact that we ‘continue to walk as straight 
as we can in one direction’; the positive reasons given by ideology to justify 
this request - to make us obey ideological form - are there only to conceal 


13 Rene Descartes, Discourse on Method, Harmondsworch: Penguin, 1976, p. 64. 



FROM SYMPTOM TO SINTHOME 91 


this fact: in other words, to conceal the surplus-enjoyment proper to the 
ideological form as such. 

Here we could refer to the notion, introduced by Jon Elster, of ‘states 
that are essentially by-products’ - that is, states that could be produced 
only as non-intended, as the side-effect of our activity: as soon as we aim 
directly at them, as soon as our activity is directly motivated by them, our 
procedure becomes self-defeating. From a whole series ofideological exam- 
ples evoked by Elster, let us take Tocqueville’s justification of the jury 
system: ‘I do not know whether a jury is useful to the litigants, but I am 
sure that it is very good for those who have to decide the case. I regard it 
as one of the most effective means of popular education at society’s 
disposal.’ Elster’s comment on this is that 

a necessary condition for the jury system to have the educational effects 
on the jurors for which Tocqueville recommended it is their belief that 
they are doing something that is worthwhile and important, beyond 
their own personal development. 14 

In other words, as soon as the jurors become aware that the judicial effects 
of their work are rather null and that the real point of it is its effect on 
their own civic spirit - its educational value - this educational effect is spoilt. 

It is the same with Pascal, with his argument for the religious wager: 
even if we are wrong in our wager, even if there is no God, my belief in 
God and my acting upon it will have many beneficial effects in my terres- 
trial life - 1 will lead a dignified, calm, moral, satisfying life, free of pertur- 
bations and doubts. But the point is again that I can achieve this terrestrial 
profit only if I really believe in God, in the religious beyond; this is 
probably the hidden, rather cynical logic of Pascal’s argument: although 
the real stake of religion is the terrestrial profit achieved by the religious 
attitude, this gain is a ‘state that is essentially a by-product’ - it can be 
produced only as a non-intended result of our belief in a religious beyond. 


14 [on Elster, Sour Grapes, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982, p. 96. 



92 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


It should be no surprise to us that we find exactly the same argument 
in Rosa Luxemburg’s description of the revolutionary process: at the begin- 
ning, the first workers’ struggles are doomed to fail, their direct aims 
cannot be achieved, but although they necessarily end in failure, their 
overall balance sheet is none the less positive because their main gain is 
educational - that is to say, they serve the formation of the working class 
into the revolutionary subject. And again, the point is that if we (the Party) 
say directly to the fighting workers: ‘It does not matter if you fail, the 
main point ofyour struggle is its educational effect on you’, the educational 
effect will be lost. 

It is as if Descartes, in the quoted passage, is giving us, perhaps for the 
first time, the pure form of this fundamental ideological paradox: what 
is really at stake in ideology is its form, the fact that we continue to walk 
as straight as we can in one direction, that we follow even the most dubious 
opinions once our mind has been made up regarding them; but this 
ideological attitude can be achieved only as a ‘state that is essentially by- 
product’: the ideological subjects, ‘travellers lost in a forest’, must conceal 
from themselves the fact that ‘it was possibly chance alone that first 
determined them in their choice’; they must believe that their decision 
is well founded, that it will lead to their Goal. As soon as they perceive 
that the real goal is the consistent of the ideological attitude itself, the effect is 
self-defeating. We can see how ideology works in a way exactly opposed 
to the popular idea of Jesuit morals: the aim here is to justify the means. 

Why must this inversion of the relation of aim and means remain 
hidden, why is its revelation self-defeating? Because it would reveal the 
enjoyment which is at work in ideology, in the ideological renunciation 
itself In other words, it would reveal that ideology serves only its own 
purpose, that it does not serve anything - which is precisely the Lacanian 
definition of jouissance. 



LACK IN THE OTHER 




3 ‘Che Vuoi?’ 


Identity 


The ideological 'quilt' 

What creates and sustains the identity of a given ideological field beyond 
all possible variations ofits positive content? Hegemony and Socialist Strategy 
delineates what is probably the definitive answer to this crucial question 
of the theory of ideology: the multitude of ‘floating signifiers’, of proto- 
ideological elements, is structured into a unified field through the inter- 
vention of a certain ‘nodal point’ (the Lacanian point de capiton) which 
‘quilts’ them, stops their sliding and fixes their meaning. 

Ideological space is made of non-bound, non-tied elements, ‘floating 
signifiers’, whose very identity is ‘open’, overdetermined by their 
articulation in a chain with other elements - that is, their ‘literal’ 
signification depends on their metaphorical surplus-signification. 
Ecologism, for example: its connection with other ideological elements 
is not determined in advance; one can be a state-orientated ecologist (if 
one believes that only the intervention of a strong state can save us from 
catastrophe), a socialist ecologist (if one locates the source of merciless 
exploitation of nature in the capitalist system), a conservative ecologist 
(ifone preaches that man must again become deeply rooted in his native 
soil), and so on; feminism can be socialist, apolitical; even racism could be 
elitist or populist . . . The ‘quilting’ performs the totalization by means 
of which this free floating of ideological elements is halted, fixed - that 



96 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


is to say, by means of which they become parts of the structured network 
of meaning. 

If we ‘quilt’ the floating signiflets through ‘Communism’, for example, 
‘class struggle’ confers a precise and fixed signification to all other elements: 
to democracy (so-called ‘real democracy’ as opposed to 'bourgeois formal 
democracy’ as a legal form of exploitation); to feminism (the exploitation 
of women as resulting from the class-conditioned division of labour); to 
ecologism (the destruction of natural resources as a logical consequence 
of profit-orientated capitalist production); to the peace movement (the 
principal danger to peace is adventuristic imperialism), and so on. 

What is at stake in the ideological struggle is which ofthe ‘nodal points’, 
points de capiton, will totalize, include in its series of equivalences, these free- 
floating elements. Today, for example, the stake of the struggle between 
neo-conservatism and social democracy is ‘freedom’: neo-conservatives try 
to demonstrate how egalitarian democracy, embodied in the welfare state, 
necessarily leads to new forms of serfdom, to the dependency of the 
individual on the totalitarian state, while social democrats stress how 
individual freedom, to have any meaning at all, must be based upon demo- 
cratic social life, equality of economic opportunity, and so forth. 

In this way, every element of a given ideological field is part of a series 
of equivalences: its metaphorical surplus, through which it is connected 
with all other elements, determines retroactively its very identity (in a 
Communist perspective, to fight for peace means to fight against the 
capitalist order, and so on). But this enchainment is possible only on condi- 
tion that a certain signifier - the Lacanian ‘One’ - 'quilts’ the whole field 
and, by embodying it, effectuates its identity. 

Let us take the Ladau/Mouffe project of radical democracy: here, we 
have an articulation of particular struggles (for peace, ecology, feminism, 
human rights, and so on), none of which pretends to be the ‘Truth’, the 
last Signified, the ‘true Meaning’ of all the others; but the title ‘radical 
democracy’ itself indicates how the very possibility of their articulation 
implies the ‘nodal’, determining role of a certain struggle which, precisely 
as a particular struggle, outlines the horizon of all the other struggles. 



‘CHE VUOI V 


97 


This determining role belongs, of course, to democracy, to ‘democratic 
invention’: according to Laclau and Mouffe, all other struggles (socialist, 
feminist . . . ) could be conceived as the gradual radicalization, extension, 
application of the democratic project to new domains (of economic rela- 
tions, of the relations between sexes . . . ). The dialectical paradox lies in 
the fact that the particular struggle playing a hegemonic role, far from 
enforcing a violent suppression of the differences, opens the very space for 
the relative autonomy of the particular struggles: the feminist struggle, 
for example, is made possible only through reference to democratic- 
egalitarian political discourse. 

The fust taskof the analysis is therefore to isolate, in a given ideological 
field, the particular struggle which at the same time determines the 
horizon of its totality - to put it in Hegelian terms, the species which is 
its own universal kind. But this is the crucial theoretical problem: how 
does this determining, totalizing role of a particular struggle differ from 
the traditionally conceived ‘hegemony’ by which a certain struggle (work- 
ers’ struggle in Marxism) appears as the Truth of all the others, so that 
all other struggles are in the last resort only forms of its expression, and 
victory in this struggle offers us the key to victory in other domains? Or, 
as the usual Marxist line of argument runs: only successful socialist 
revolution will render possible the abolition of women’s repression, the 
end of the destructive exploitation of nature, relief from the threat of 
nuclear destruction ... In other words: how do we formulate the deter- 
mining role of a particular domain without falling into a trap of essen- 
tialism? My thesis is that Saul Kripke’s antidescriptivism offers us the 
conceptual tools to solve this problem. 


Descriptivism versus antidescriptivism 

We could call the basic experience upon which Kripke’s antidescriptivism 
is founded invasion oj thebody snatchers, after the well-known 1950s science- 
fiction film: an invasion of creatures from outer space which assume 
human shape - they look exactly like human beings, they have all their 



98 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


properties, but in some sense this makes them all the more uncannily 
strange. This problem is the same as anti-Semitism (and for that reason 
Invasion of the Body Snatchers can be read as a metaphor for McCarthyite 
anti-Communism in the 15150s): Jews are like us’; it is difficult to recognize 
them, to determine at the level of positive reality that surplus, that evasive 
feature, which differentiates them from all other people. 

The stake of the dispute between descriptivism and antidescriptivism is 
the most elementary one: how do names refer to the objects they denote? 
Why does the word ‘table’ refer to a table? The descriptivist answer is the 
obvious one: because of its meaning; every word is in the first place the 
bearer of a certain meaning - that is, it means a cluster ofdescriptive features 
(‘table’ means an object of a certain shape, serving certain purposes) and 
subsequently refers to objects in reality in so far as they possess properties 
designated by the cluster of descriptions. ‘Table’ means a table because a 
table has properties comprised in the meaning of the word ‘table’. Intention 
thus has logical priority over extension: extension (a set of objects referred 
to by a word) is determined by intention (by universal properties comprised 
in its meaning). The antidescriptivist answer, in contrast, is that a word is 
connected to an object or a set of objects through an act of'primal baptism’, 
and this link maintains itself even if the cluster of descriptive features which 
initially determined the meaning of the word changes completely. 

Let us take a simplified example from Kripke: if we ask the general 
public for an identifying description of ‘Kurt Godel’, the answer would be 
‘the author of the proof of the incompleteness of arithmetic’; but suppose 
that the proof was written by another man, Schmidt, a friend of Godel, 
and that Godel murdered him and appropriated to himself the discovery 
of the proof mentioned; in this case, the name ‘Kurt Godel' would still 
refer to the same Godel, although the identifying description would no 
longer apply to him. The point is that the name ‘Godel’ has been linked 
to a certain object (person) through a ‘primal baptism’, and this link holds 
even if the original identifying description proves false. 1 This is the core 

1 Saul Kripke, Naming and Necessity, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1580, 
pp. 83 5. 



'CHE VUOI?’ 


99 


of the dispute: descriptivists emphasize the immanent, internal ‘inten- 
tional contents’ of a word, while antidescriptivists regard as decisive the 
external causal link, the way a word has been transmitted from subject 
to subject in a chain of tradition. 

Here, a first charge offers itself: is not the obvious answer to this 
dispute that we are concerned with two different types of names: with 
notions denoting (universal) kinds and with proper names? Is not its 
solution simply that descriptivism accounts for the way generic notions 
function and antidescriptivism for the way proper names function? If 
we refer to somebody as ‘fat’, it is clear that he must at least possess the 
property of being excessively corpulent, but if we refer to somebody as 
‘Peter’, we cannot infer any of his effective properties - the name ‘Peter’ 
refers to him simply because he was baptized ‘Peter’. But such a solution, 
in trying to get rid of a problem by a simple classificatory distinction, 
misses completely what is at stake in the dispute: both descriptivism 
and antidescriptivism aim at a general theory of referring functions. For 
descriptivism, proper names themselves are merely abbreviated or 
disguised definite descriptions, while for antidescriptivism the external 
causal chain determines reference even in the case of generic notions, 
at least those which designate natural kinds. Let us again take a some- 
what simplified example from Kripke: at a certain point in prehistory, 
a certain kind of object was baptized ‘gold’, and this name was at that 
point linked to a cluster of descriptive features (a heavy glittering yellow 
metal whichcan be beautifully fashioned, and so on);overthe centuries, 
this cluster of descriptions has been multiplying and changing according 
to the development of human knowledge, so that today we identify ‘gold’ 
with its specification within the periodic table and its protons, neutrons, 
electrons, spectra, and so forth; but let us suppose that today a scientist 
should discover that all the world was wrong about all properties of the 
object called ‘gold’ (the impression that it has a glittering yellow colour 
was produced by a universal optical illusion, and so on) - in this case, 
the word ‘gold’ would continue to refer to the same object as before - 
i.e. we would say ‘gold doesn’t possess the properties ascribed to it until 



100 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 

now’, not ‘the object that we have until now taken for gold is not really 
gold.’ 

The same also applies to the opposite counterfactual situation: it is 
possible that 

there might be a substance which has all the identifying marks we 
commonly attributed to gold and used to identify it in the first place, 
but which is not the same kind of thing, which is not the same 
substance. We would say of such a thing that though it has all the 
appearances we initially used to identify gold, it is not gold.' 

Why? Because this substance is not linked to the name ‘gold’ through a 
causal chain which reaches back to the ‘primal baptism’ establishing the 
reference of ‘gold’. For the same reason it must be said that 

even if archaeologists or geologists were to discover tomorrow some 
fossils conclusively showing the existence of animals in the past satis- 
fyingeverything we know about unicorns from the my th of the unicorn, 
that would not show that there were unicorns . 5 

In other words, even if these quasi-unicorns correspond perfectly to the 
cluster of descriptive features comprised by the meaning of the word 
‘unicorn’, we cannot be sure that it was they who were the original reference 
of the mythical notion of ‘unicorn’ - that is, the object to which the word 
‘unicorn’ was fastened in the ‘primal baptism’ . . . How could we overlook 
the libidinal contents of these propositions of Kripke? What is at stake 
here is precisely the problem of the ‘fulfilment of desire’: when we 
encounter in reality an object which has all the properties of the fantasized 
object of desire, we are nevertheless necessarily somewhat disappointed; 
we experience a certain ‘this is not it’; it becomes evident that the finally 


2 Ibid., p. 119. 

3 Ibid., p. 24. 



■CHE vuoir 


101 


found real object is not the reference of desire even though it possesses 
all the required properties. It is perhaps no accident that Kripke selects as 
examples objects with an extreme libidinal connotation, objects which 
already embody desire in common mythology: gold, unicorn . . . 


The two myths 

Bearing in mind how the very terrain of the dispute between descriptivism 
and antidescriptivism is thus permeated by an undercurrent of the 
economy of desire, it should come as no surprise that Lacanian theory can 
help us to clarify the terms of this dispute, not in the sense of any 
quasi-dialectical ‘synthesis’ between the two opposing views but, on the 
contrary, by pointing out how both descriptivism and antidescriptivism 
miss the same crucial point - the radical contingency of naming. The proof 
of this is that to defend their solution, both positions have to resort to a 
myth, to invent a myth: a myth of a primitive tribe in Searle, a myth of 
‘omniscient observer of history’ in Donnellan. To refute antidescrip- 
tivism, Searle invents a primitive hunter-gatherer community with a 
language containing proper names: 

Imagine that everybody in the tribe knows everybody else and that 
newborn members of the tribe are baptized at ceremonies attended by 
the entire tribe. Imagine, furthermore, that as the children grow up 
they learn the names of people as well as the local names of mountains, 
lakes, streets, houses, etc. by ostension. Suppose also that there is a 
strict taboo in this tribe against speaking of the dead, so that no one’s 
name is ever mentioned after his death. Now the point of the fantasy 
is simply this: As I have described it, this tribe has an institution of 
proper names used for reference in exactly the same way that our names 
are used for reference, but there is not a single use of a name in the tribe 
that satisfies the causal chain of communication theory . 4 


4 John Searle, Intentionally, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984, p. 240. 



102 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


In other words, in this tribe every use of the name satisfies the descriptivist 
claim: the reference is determined exclusively by a cluster of descriptive 
features. Searle knows, of course, that such a tribe never existed; his point 
is only that the way naming functions in this tribe is logically primordial 
that all the counter-examples used by antidescriptivists are logically 
secondary, they are ‘parasitic’, they imply prior ‘descriptivist’ functioning. 
When all we know about somebody is that his name is Smith - when the 
only intentional content of ‘Smith’ is ‘the person others refer to as Smith’ 
- such a condition logically presupposes the existence of at least one other 
subject who knows a lot more about Smith - to whom the name ‘Smith’ 
is connected with a whole cluster of descriptive features (an old fat gentle- 
man giving a course on the history of pornography . . . ). In other words, 
the case offered by antidescriptivism as ‘normal’ (the transmission of the 
reference through an external causal chain) is only an ‘external’ description 
(a description leaving out of consideration the intentional content) of a 
functioning which is ‘parasitic’ - that is, logically secondary. 

To refute Searle, we have to demonstrate that his primitive tribe, in 
which language functions exclusively in a descriptive way, is not only 
empirically but also logically impossible. The Derridean procedure would, 
of course, be to show how the ‘parasitic’ use always corrodes, and has from 
the very start corroded, the purely descriptive functioning: how Searle's 
myth of a primitive tribe presents just another version of a totally trans- 
parent community in which referring is not blurred by any absence, by 
any lack. 

The Lacanian approach would emphasize another feature: there is 
simply something missing in Searle’s description of his tribe. If we are 
really concerned with language in a strict sense, with language as a social 
network in which meaning exists only in so far as it is intersubjectively 
recognized - with language which, by definition, cannot be ‘private’ - 
then it must be part of the meaning of each name that it refers to a certain 
object because this is its name, because others use this name to designate 
the object in question: every name, in so far as it is part of common 
language, implies this self-referential, circular moment. ‘Others’, of course, 



'CHE VUOI?' 


103 


cannot be reduced to empirical others; they rather point to the Lacanian 
‘big Other’, to the symbolic order itself. 

Here we encounter the dogmatic stupidity proper to a signifter as such, 
the stupidity which assumes the shape of a tautology: a name refers to an 
object because this object is called that- this impersonal form (‘it is called’] 
announces the dimension of the ‘big Other’ beyond other subjects. The 
example evoked by Searle as an epitome of parasitism - the example of 
speakers who know nothing about the object of which they are speaking 
and whose ‘only intentional content might be that they are using the 
name to refer to what others are using it to refer to’ 5 - indicates, on the 
contrary, a necessary constituent of every ‘normal’ use of names in language 
as a social bond - and this tautological constituent is the Lacanian master- 
signifier, the ‘signifter without signified’. 

The ironic part of it is that this lack is actually inscribed in Searle’s 
description in the form of a prohibition (' . . . there is a strict taboo in this 
tribe against speaking of the dead’]: Searle’s mythical tribe is thus a tribe 
of psychotics which - because of the taboo concerning names of dead 
persons - forecloses the function of the Name-of-the-Father - that is to 
say, prevents the transformation of the dead father into the rule of his 
Name. If, consequently, Searle’s descripti vism misses the dimension of the 
big Other , antidescriptivism - at least in its predominant version - misses 
the small other, the dimension of the object as Real in the Lacanian sense: 
the distinction Real/reality. This is why it looks for that X, for the feature 
guaranteeing the identity of a reference through all changes of its descrip- 
tive properties, in the reality itself; this is why it must invent its own 
myth, a kind of counterpoint to Searle’s primitive tribe, Donnellan’s myth 
of an ‘omniscient observer of history’. Donnellan has constructed the 
following ingenious counterfactual example: 

Suppose that all that a certain speaker knows or thinks he knows about 

Thales is that he is the Greek philosopher who said that all is water. 


5 Ibid., p. 259. 



104 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


But suppose there never was a Greek philosopher who said such a thing. 
Suppose that Aristotle and Herodotus were referring to a well digger 
who said, ‘I wish all were water so I wouldn’t have to dig these damned 
wells’. In such a case, when the speaker uses the name ‘Thales’ he is 
referring to that well digger. Furthermore, suppose there was a hermit 
who never had any dealings with anyone, who actually held that all 
was water. Still, when we say ‘Thales’ we are plainly not referring to 
that hermit/ 

Today, the original reference, the starting point of a causal chain - the 
poor well digger - is unknown to us; but an ‘omniscient observer of history’ 
capable of following the causal chain to the act of ‘primal baptism’ would 
know how to restore the original link connecting the word 'Thales’ to its 
reference. Why is this myth, this antidescriptivist version of the Lacanian 
‘subject presumed to know’, necessary? 

The basic problem ofantidescriptivism is to determine what constitutes 
the identity of the designated object beyond the ever-changing cluster of 
descriptive features - what makes an object identical-to-itself even if all 
its properties have changed; in other words, how to conceive the objective 
correlative to the ‘rigid designator’, to the name in so far as it denotes the 
same object in all possible worlds, in all counterfactual situations. What 
is overlooked, at least in the standard version of antidescriptivism, is that 
this guaranteeing the identity of an object in all counterfactual situations 
- through a change of all its descriptive features - is the retroactive effect of 
naming itself. it is the name itself, the signifier, which supports the identity 
of the object. That ‘surplus’ in the object which stays the same in all 
possible worlds is ‘something in it more than itself, that is to say the 
Lacanian objet petit a: we search in vain for it in positive reality because it 
has no positive consistency - because it is just an objectification of a void, 
of a discontinuity opened in reality by the emergence of the signifier. It 
is the same with gold; we search in vain in its positive, physical features 


6 Ibid., p. 252. 



'CHE VUOI ?' 


105 


for that X which makes of it the embodiment of richness; or, to use an 
example from Marx, it is the same with a commodity: we search in vain 
among its positive properties for the feature which constitutes its value 
(and not only its use-value]. What is missed by the antidescriptivist idea 
of an external causal chain of communication through which reference is 
transmitted is therefore the radical contingency of naming, the fact that 
naming itself retroactively constitutes its reference. Naming is necessary 
but it is, so to speak, necessary afterwards, retroactively, once we are already 

C ■ > 

in it. 

The role of the myth of the ‘omniscient observer of history’ therefore 
corresponds exactly to that of Searle’s myth of the primitive tribe: in both 
cases its function is to limit, to restrain the radical contingency of naming 
- to construct an agency guaranteeing its necessity. In the first instance, 
the reference is guaranteed by the ‘intentional content’ immanent to the 
name; in the second, it is guaranteed by the causal chain which brings us 
to the ‘primal baptism’ linking the word to the object. If, in this dispute 
between descriptivism and antidescriptivism, the ‘truth’ lies, for all that, 
in antidescriptivism, it is because antidescriptivism’s error is of another 
kind: in its myth, antidescriptivism blinds itself to its own result, to what 
it ‘has produced without knowing it’. The main achievement of anti- 
descriptivism is to enable us to conceive objet a as the real-impossible 
correlative of the ‘rigid designator’ - that is, of the point decapitoti as ‘pure’ 
signifies 


Rip id designator and objet a 

If we maintain that the point de capiton is a ‘nodal point’, a kind of knot 
of meanings, this does not imply that it is simply the ‘richest’ word, the 
word in which is condensed all the richness of meaning of the field it 
‘quilts’: the point de capiton is rather the word which, as a word, on the level 
of the signifier itself, unifies a given field, constitutes its identity: it is, so to 
speak, the word to which ‘things’ themselves refer to recognize themselves 
in their unity. Let us take the case of the famous advertisement for 



106 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


Marlboro: the picture of the bronzed cowboy, the wide prairie plains, and 
so on - all this ‘connotes’, of course, a certain image of America (the land 
of hard, honest people, of limitless horizons . . . ) but the effect of'quilting’ 
occurs only when a certain inversion takes place; it does not occur until 
‘real’ Americans start to identify themselves (in their ideological self- 
experience] with the image created by the Marlboro advertisement - until 
America itself is experienced as ‘Marlboro country’. 

It is the same for all so-called ‘mass-media symbols’ of America - Coca- 
Cola, for example: the point is not that Coca-Cola ‘connotes’ a certain 
ideological experience-vision of America (the freshness of its sharp, cold 
taste, and so on); the point is that this vision of America itself achieves its 
identity by identifying itself with the signifier ‘Coke’ - ‘America, this is 
Coke!’ could be the wording of an imbecile publicity device. The crucial 
point to grasp is that this device - ‘America [the ideological vision of a land 
in all its diversity], this is Coke [this signifier]/’ - could not be inverted as 
‘Coke [this signifier], this is [this means] America!’ The only possible answer 
to the question ‘What is Coke?’ is already given in the advertisements: it 
is the impersonal ‘it’ (‘Coke, this is it!’) - ‘the real thing’, the unattainable 
X, the object-cause of desire. 

Precisely because of this surplus-X, the operation of ‘quilting’ is not 
circular-symmetrical - we cannot say that we gain nothing from it because 
Coke first connotes ‘the spirit of America’, and this ‘spirit of America’ (the 
cluster of features supposed to express it) is then condensed in Coke as its 
signifier, its signifying representative: what we gain from this simple 
inversion is precisely the surplus-X, the object-cause of desire, that ‘unat- 
tainable something’ which is ‘in Coke more than Coke’ and which, 
according to the Lacanian formula, could suddenly change into excrement, 
into undrinkable mud (it is enough for Coke to be served warm and stale). 

The logic of this inversion producing a surplus could be made clear 
apropos of anti-Semitism: at first, ‘Jew’ appears as a signifier connoting 
a cluster of supposedly ‘effective’ properties (intriguing spirit, greedy 
for gain, and so on), but this is not yet anti-Semitism proper. To achieve 
that, we must invert the relation and say: they are like that (greedy, 



‘CHE vuoir 


107 


intriguing . . . ) because they are Jews. This inversion seems at first sight 
purely tautological - we could retort: of course it is so, because ‘Jewish’ 
means precisely greedy, intriguing, dirty . . . But this appearance of 
tautology is false: ‘Jew’ in ‘because they are Jews’ does not connote a series 
of effective properties, it refers again to that unattainable X, to what is ‘in 
Jew more than Jew’ and what Nazism tried so desperately to seize, 
measure, change into a positive property enabling us to identify Jews in 
an objective-scientific way. 

The ‘rigid designator’ aims, then, at that impossible-real kernel, at what 
is ‘in an object more than the object’, at this surplus produced by the 
signifying operation. And the crucial point to grasp is the connection 
between the radical contingency of naming and the logic of emergence of 
the ‘rigid designator’ through which a given object achieves its identity. 
The radical contingency of naming implies an irreducible gap between 
the Real and modes of its symbolization: a certain historical constellation 
can be symbolized in different ways; the Real itself contains no necessary 
mode of its symbolization. 

Let us take the defeat of France in 1940: the key to Petain’s success was 
that his symbolization of the trauma of defeat (‘the defeat is a result of a 
long degenerated tradition of democracy and Jewish antisocial influence; 
as such, it has a sobering effect in offering France a new chance to build 
its social body on new, corporatist, organic foundations . . . j prevailed. 
In this way, what had been experienced a moment ago as traumatic, 
incomprehensible loss became readable, obtained meaning. But the point 
is that this symbolization was not inscribed in the Real itself: never do 
we reach the point at which ‘the circumstances themselves begin to s peak’, 
the point at which language starts to function immediately as ‘language 
of the Real’: the predominance of Petain’s symbolization was a result of a 
struggle for ideological hegemony. 

It is because the Real itself offers no support for a direct symbolization 
of it - because every symbolization is in the last resort contingent - that 
the only way the experience of a given historic reality can achieve its unity 
is through the agency of a signifier, through reference to a ‘pure’ signifier. 



108 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


It is not the real object which guarantees as the point of reference the 
unity and identity of a certain ideological experience - on the contrary, it 
is the reference to a ‘pure’ signifier which gives unity and identity to our 
experience of historical reality itself Historical reality is of course always 
symbolized; the way we experience it is always mediated through different 
modes of symbolization: all Lacan adds to this phenomenological co mmon 
wisdom is the fact that the unity of a given ‘experience of meaning’, itself 
the horizon of an ideological field of meaning, is supported by some ‘pure’, 
meaningless ‘signifier without the signified’. 


The ideological anamorphosis 

We can now see how the Kripkean theory of 'rigid designator’ - of a certain 
pure signifier which designates, and at the same time constitutes, the 
identity of a given object beyond the variable cluster of its descriptive 
properties - offers a conceptual apparatus enabling us to conceive precisely 
the status of Laclau’s ‘anti-essentialism’. Let us take, for example, notions 
like ‘democracy’, ‘socialism’, ‘Marxism’: the essentialist illusion consists 
in the belief that it is possible to determine a definite cluster of features, 
of positive properties, however minimal, which defines the permanent 
essence of ‘democracy’ and similar terms - every phenomenon which 
pretends to be classified as ‘democratic’ should fulfil the condition of 
possessing this cluster of features. In contrast to this 'essentialist illusion’, 
Laclau’s anti-essentialism compels us to conclude that it is impossible to 
define any such essence, any cluster of positive properties which would 
remain the same in 'all possible worlds’ - in all counterfactual situations. 

In the last resort, the only way to define ‘democracy’ is to say that it 
contains all political movements and organizations which legitimize, 
designate themselves as ‘democratic’; the only way to define ‘Marxism’ is 
to say that this term designates all movements and theories which legit- 
imize themselves through reference to Marx, and so on. In other words, 
the only possible definition of an object in its identity is that this is the 
object which is always designated by the same signifier - tied to the same 



'CHE VUOI?' 


109 


signifier. It is the signifier which constitutes the kernel of the object’s 
‘identity’. 

Let us return again to ‘democracy’: is there - on the level of positive, 
descriptive features - really anything in common between the liberal- 
individualist notion of democracy and the real-socialist theory, according 
to which the basic feature of ‘real democracy’ is the leading role of the 
Party representing the true interests of the people and thus assuring their 
effective rule? 

Here we should not be misled by the obvious but false solution that 
the real-socialist notion of democracy is simply wrong, degenerated, a kind 
of perverse travesty of true democracy - in the final analysis, ‘democracy’ 
is defined not by the positive content of this notion (its signified) but only 
by its positional-relational identity - by its opposition, its differential 
relation to ‘non-democratic’ - whereas the concrete content can vary in 
the extreme: to mutual exclusion (for real socialist Marxists, the term 
‘democratic’ designates the very phenomena which, for a traditional 
liberalist, are the embodiment of anti-democratic totalitarianism). 

This then is the fundamental paradox of the point decapiton: the ‘rigid 
designator’, which totalizes an ideology by bringing to a halt the 
metonymic sliding of its signified, is not a point of supreme density of 
Meaning, a kind of Guarantee which, by being itself excepted from the 
differential interplay of elements, would serve as a stable and fixed point 
of reference. On the contrary, it is the element which represents the agency 
of the signifier within the field of the signified. In itself it is nothing but 
a 'pure difference’: its role is purely structural, its nature is purely perfor- 
mative - its signification coincides with its own act of enunciation; in 
short, it is a ‘signifier without the signified’. The crucial step in the analysis 
of an ideological edifice is thus to detect, behind the dazzling splendour 
of the element which holds it together (‘God’, ‘Country’, ‘Party’, ‘Class’ . . . ), 
this self-referential, tautological, performative operation. A ‘Jew’, for 
example, is in the last resort one who is stigmatized with the signifier 
‘Jew’; all the phantasmic richness of the traits supposed to characterize 
Jews (avidity, the spirit of intrigue, and so on) is here to conceal not the 



1 10 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


fact that ‘Jews are really not like that’, not the empirical reality of Jews, 
but the fact that in the anti-Semitic construction of a ‘Jew’, we are 
concerned with a purely structural function. 

The properly ‘ideological’ dimension is therefore the effect of a certain 
‘error of perspective’; the element which represents within the field of 
Meaning, the agency of pure signifier - the element through which the 
signifier’s non-sense erupts in the midst of Meaning - is perceived as a 
point of extreme saturation of Meaning, as the point which ‘gives meaning’ 
to all the others and thus totalizes the field of (ideological) meaning. The 
element which represents, in the structure of the utterance, the immanence 
of its own process of enunciation is experienced as a kind of transcendent 
Guarantee, the element which only holds the place of a certain lack, which 
is in its bodily presence nothing but an embodiment of a certain lack, is 
perceived as a point of supreme plenitude. In short, pure difference is 
perceived as identity exempted from the relational-differential interplay and 
guaranteeing its homogeneity. 

We could denote this ‘error of perspective’ as ideological anamorphosis. 
Lacan often refers to Holbein’s ‘Ambassadors’: if we look at what appears 
from the frontal view as an extended, ‘erected’ meaningless spot, from 
the right perspective we notice the contours of a skull. The criticism of 
ideology must perform a somewhat homological operation: if we look 
at the element which holds together the ideological edifice, at this 
‘phallic’, erected Guarantee of Meaning, from the right (or, more precisely 
- politically speaking - left) perspective, we are able to recognize in it 
the embodiment of a lack, of a chasm of non-sense gaping in the midst 
of ideological meaning. 



‘CHE VUOI?' I I I 


Identification 

(Lower Level of the Graph of Desire] 

Retroactivity of meaning 

Now, having clarified the way the point de capiton functions as ‘rigid 
designator’ - as thesignifier maintaining its identity through all variations 
of its signified - we have reached the real problem: does this totalizing of a 
given ideological field through the operation of ‘quilting’, which fixes its 
meaning, result in the absence of remnants; does it abolish the endless floating 
ofsignifiers without residue? If not, how do we conceive the dimension which 
escapes it? The answer is obtained by the Lacanian graph of desire. 7 


Graph I 



Lacan articulated this graph in four successive forms; in explaining it 
we should not limit ourselves to the last, complete form, because the succes- 
sion of the four forms cannot be reduced to a linear gradual completion; 
it implies the retroactive changing of preceding forms. For example, the 
last, complete form, containing the articulation of the upper level of the 
graph (the vector from ? (0) to S OD*), 8 can be grasped only if we read it as 

7 See Jacques Lacan, ‘Subversion of the Subject and the Dialectic of Desite’, Ecrics:A 
Selection, New York: W. W. Norton, 1977. 

8 For propaeduetic reasons, we use in this chapter the English transcription of Lacan’s 
mathemes (O, not A, etc.). 



112 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


an elaboration of the question ‘Che vuoi?’ marked by the preceding form: 
if we forget that this upper level is nothing but an articulation of the 
inner structure of a question emanating from the Other to which the 
subject is confronted beyond symbolic identification, we necessarily miss 
its point. 

Let us then begin with the first form, with the ‘elementary cell ofdesire’ 
(see Graph I above ). What we have here is simply the graphic presentation 
of the relation between signifier and signified. As is well known, Saussure 
visualized this relation as two parallel undulating lines or two surfaces of 
the same sheet: the linear progression of the signified runs parallel to the 
linear articulation of the signifier. Lacan structures this double movement 
quite differently: some mythical, pre-symbolic intention (markedA) ‘quilts’ 
the signifier’s chain, the series of the signifier marked by the vector S'. 
The product of this quilting (what 'comes out on the other side’ after the 
mythical - real - intention goes through the signifier and steps out ofit) 
is the subject marked by the matheme ? (the divided, split subject, and at 
the same time the effaced signifier, the lack of signifier, the void, an empty 
space in the signifier’s network). This minimal articulation already attests 
to the fact that we are dealing with the process of interpellation of individuals 
(this pre-symbolic, mythical entity - with Althusser, too, the ‘individual’ 
which is interpellated into subject is not conceptually defined, it is simply 
a hypothetical X which must be presupposed) into subjects. The point de 
capiton is the point through which the subject is ‘sewn’ to the signifier, 
and at the same time the point which interpellates individual into subject 
by addressing it with the call of a certain master-signifier (‘Communism’, 
‘God’, ‘Freedom’, 'America') - in a word, it is the point of the sub jectivation 
of the signifier’s chain. 

A crucial feature at this elementary level of the graph is the fact that 
the vector of the subjective intention quilts the vector of the signifier’s 
chain backwards, in a retroactive direction: it steps out of the chain at a 
point preceding the point at which it has pierced it. Lacan’s emphasis is 
precisely on this retroactive character of the effect of signification with 
respect to the signifier, on this staying behind of the signified with respect 



'CHE VUOI ?’ 


113 


to the progression of the signifier’s chain: the effect of meaning is always 
produced backwards, apr'es coup. Signifiers which are still in a ‘floating’ 
state - whose signification is not yet fixed - follow one another. Then, at 
a certain point - precisely the point at which the intention pierces the 
signifier’s chain, traverses it - some signifier fixes retroactively the meaning 
of the chain, sews the meaning to the signifier, halts the sliding of the 
meaning. 

To grasp this fully, we have only to remember the above-mentioned 
example of ideological ‘quilting’: in the ideological space float signifiers 
like ‘freedom’, ‘state’, ‘justice’, ‘peace’ . . . and then their chain is supple- 
mented with some master-signifier (‘Communism’) which retroactively 
determines their (Communist) meaning: ‘freedom’ is effective only 
through surmounting bourgeois formal freedom, which is merely a form 
of slavery; the ‘state’ is the means by which the ruling class guarantees 
the conditions of its rule; market exchange cannot be ‘just and equitable’ 
because the very form of equivalent exchange between labour and capital 
implies exploitation; ‘war’ is inherent to class society as such; only the 
socialist revolution can bring about lasting ‘peace’, and so forth. (Liberal- 
democratic ‘quilting’ would, of course, produce a quite different articula- 
tion of meaning; conservative ‘quilting’ a meaning opposed to both 
previous fields, and so on.) 

Already, at this elementary level, we can locate the logic of transference 
- the basic mechanism that produces the illusion proper to the phenomena 
of transference: transference is the obverse of the staying behind of the signi- 
fied with respect to the stream of the signifiers; it consists of the illusion 
that the meaning of a certain element (which was retroactively fixed by the 
intervention of the master-signifier) was present in it from the very begin- 
ning as its immanent essence. We are ‘in transference’ when it appears to 
us that real freedom is ‘in its very nature’ opposed to bourgeois formal free- 
dom, that the state is ‘in its very nature’ only a tool of class domination, and 
so on. The paradox lies, of course, in the fact that this transferential illusion 
is necessary, it is the very measure of success of the operation of ‘quilting’: 
the capitonnage is successful only in so far as it effaces its own traces. 



I 14 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


The 'effect of retroversion’ 

This therefore is the fundamental Lacanian thesis concerning the relation 
between signifier and signified: instead of the linear, immanent, necessary 
progression according to which meaning unfolds itself from some initial 
kernel, we have a radically contingent process of retroactive production 
of meaning. In this way, we have arrived at the second form of the graph 
of desire - at the specification of the two points at which the intention 
(A) cuts the signifying chain: O and j( 0), the big Other and the signified 
as its function: 


Graph II 



Why do we find 0 - that is, the big Other as the synchronous symbolic 
code - at the point decapiton? Is not the point decapi ton precisely the One, 
a singular signifier occupying an exceptional place with respect to the 
paradigmatic network of the code? To understand this apparent incoher- 
ence, we have only to remember that the point de capiton fixes the meaning 
of the preceding elements: that is to say, it retroactively submits them to 
some code, it regulates their mutual relations according to this code (for 
example, in the case we mentioned, according to the code which regulates 
the Communist universe of meaning). We could say that the pointdecapiton 
represents, holds the place of, the big Other, the synchronous code, in the 
diachronous signifier’s chain: a proper Lacanian paradox in which a 



'CHE VUOI ?’ 


I 15 


synchronous, paradigmatic structure exists only in so far as it is itself again 
embodied in One, in an exceptional singular element. 

From what we have just said, it is also clear why the other cross point 
of the two vectors is marked by s(0): at this point we find the signified, 
the meaning, which is a function of the big Other - which is produced as 
a retroactive effect of ‘quilting’, backwards from the point at which the 
relation between floating signifiers is fixed through reference to the 
synchronous symbolic code. 

And why is the right, last part of the vector of the signifier S-S' - the 
part subsequent to the point de capiton - designated as ‘Voice’? To solve 
this enigma, we must conceive the voice in a strictly Lacanian way: not as 
a bearer of plenitude and self-presence of meaning (as with Derrida) but 
as a meaningless object, as an objectal remnant, leftover, of the signifying 
operation, of the capitonnage. the voice is what is left over after we subtract 
from the signifier the retroactive operation of ‘quilting’ which produces 
meaning. The clearest concrete embodiment of this objectal status of the 
voice is the hypnotic voice: when the same word is repeated to us indef- 
initely we become disorientated, the word loses the last traces of its 
meaning, all that is left is its inert presence exerting a kind of somniferous 
hypnotic power - this is the voice as ‘object’, as the objectal leftover of the 
signifying operation. 

There is yet another feature of the second form of the graph to be 
explained: the change at its bottom. Instead of the mythical intention (A) 
and the subject (?) produced when this intention traverses the signifying 
chain, we have at the bottom right the subject which pierces the signifying 
chain, and the product of this operation is now marked as 1(0). So, first: 
why is the subject displaced from left (result) to right (starting point of 
the vector)? Lacan himself points out that we are dealing here with the 
‘effect ofretroversion’ - with the transferential illusion according to which 
the subject becomes at every stage ‘what it always already was’: a retroactive 
effect is experienced as something which was already there from the begin- 
ning. Second point: why have we now at the bottom left, as the result of 
the subject’s vector, 1(0)? Here we have finally arrived at identification. 1(0) 



1 16 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


stands for symbolic identification, for the identification of the subject with 
some signifying feature, trait (I), in the big Other, in the symbolic order. 

This feature is the one which, according to the Lacanian definition of 
the signifier, ‘represents the subject for another signifier’; it assumes 
concrete, recognizable shape in a name or in a mandate that the subject 
takes upon himself and/or that is bestowed on him. This symbolic 
identification is to be distinguished from imaginary identification marked 
by a new level inserted between the vector of the signifier (S-S'j and the 
symbolic identification: the axis connecting imaginary ego [e] and its 
imaginary other, i(o) - to achieve self-identity, the subject must identify 
himself with the imaginary other, he must alienate himself - put his 
identity outside himself, so to speak, into the image of his double. 

The ‘effect of retroversion’ is based precisely upon this imaginary level 
- it is supported by the illusion of the self as the autonomous agent which 
is present from the very beginning as the origin of its acts: this imaginary 
self-experience is for the subject the way to misrecognize his radical 
dependence on the big Other, on the symbolic order as his decentred cause. 
But instead of repeating this thesis of the ego’s constitutive alienation in 
its imaginary Other - the Lacanian theory of the mirror stage which is to 
be situated precisely on the axis e-i(o)- we should rather focus our attention 
on the crucial difference between imaginary and symbolic identification. 


Image and gaze 

The relation between imaginary and symbolic identification - between 
the ideal ego [ idealich ] and the ego-ideal [ Ich-ldeal ] - is - to use the distinc- 
tion made by Jacques-Alain Miller (in his unpublished Seminar] - that 
between ‘constituted’ and ‘constitutive’ identification: to put it simply, 
imaginary identification is identification with the image in which we 
appear likeable to ourselves, with the image representing ‘what we would 
like to be’, and symbolic identification, identification with the very place 
from where we are being observed, from where we look at ourselves so that 
we appear to ourselves likeable, worthy of love. 



‘CHE VUOI?’ 


117 


Our predominant, spontaneous idea ofidentification is that of imitat- 
ing models, ideals, image-makers: it is noted (usually from the conde- 
scending ‘mature’ perspective] how young people identify with popular 
heroes, pop singers, film stars, sportsmen . . . This spontaneous notion is 
doubly misleading. First, the feature, the trait on the basis of which we 
identify with someone, is usually hidden - it is by no means necessarily 
a glamorous feature. 

Neglecting this paradox can lead to serious political miscalculations; 
let us mention only the 1986 Austrian presidential campaign, with the 
controversial figure of Waldheim at its centre. Starting from the assump- 
tion that Waldheim was attracting voters because of his great-statesman 
image, leftists put the emphasis of their campaign on proving to the public 
that not only is Waldheim a man with a dubious past (probably involved 
in war crimes) but also a man who is not prepared to confront his past, a 
man who evades crucial questions concerning it - in short, a man whose 
basic feature is a refusal to ‘work through’ the traumatic past. What they 
overlooked was that it was precisely this feature with which the majority 
of centrist voters identified. Post-war Austria is a country whose very 
existence is based on a refusal to ‘work through’ its traumatic Nazi past 
- proving that Waldheim was evading confrontation with his past 
emphasized the exact trait-of-identification of the majority of voters. 

The theoretical lesson to be learned from this is that the trait-of- 
identification can also be a certain failure, weakness, guilt of the other, so 
that by pointing out the failure we can unwittingly reinforce the 
identification. Rightist ideology in particular is very adroit at offering 
people weakness or guilt as an identifying trait: we find traces of this even 
with Hitler. In his public appearances, people specifically identified them- 
selves with what were hysterical outbursts of impotent rage - that is, they 
‘recognized’ themselves in this hysterical acting out. 

But the second, even more serious error is to overlook the fact that 
imaginary identification is always identification on behalf of a certaingaze 
in the Other. So, apropos of every imitation of a model-image, apropos of 
every ‘playing a role’, the question to ask is: forwhom is the subject enacting 



118 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


this role? Which gaze is considered when the subject identifies himself 
with a certain image? This gap between the way I see myself and the point 
from which I am being observed to appear likeable to myself is crucial for 
grasping hysteria (and obsessional neurosis as its subspecies] - for so-called 
hysterical theatre: when we take the hysterical woman in the act of such 
a theatrical outburst, it is of course clear that she is doing this to offer 
herself to the Other as the object of its desire, but concrete analysis has 
to discover who - which subject - embodies for her the Other. Behind an 
extremely ‘feminine’ imaginary figure, we can thus generally discover 
some kind of masculine, paternal identification: she is enacting fragile 
femininity, but on the symbolic level she is in fact identified with the 
paternal gaze, to which she wants to appear likeable. 

This gap is brought to its extreme with the obsessional neurotic: on 
the ‘constituted’, imaginary, phenomenal level he is of course caught in 
the masochistic logic of his compulsive acts, he is humiliating himself, 
preventing his success, organizing his failure, and so on; but the crucial 
question is again how to locate the vicious, superego gaze for which he is 
humiliating himself, for which this obsessional organizing of failure 
procures pleasure. This gap can best be articulated with the help of the 
Hegelian couple ‘for-the-other’/‘for-itself: the hysterical neurotic is expe- 
riencing himself as somebody who is enacting a role for the other, his 
imaginary identification is his ‘being-for-the-other’, and the crucial break 
that psychoanalysis must accomplish is to induce him to realize how he 
is himself this other for whom he is enacting a role - how his being-for- 
the-other is his being-for-himself, because he is himself already symbolically 
identified with the gaze for which he is playing his role. 

To make this difference between imaginary and symbolic identification 
clear, let us take some non-dinical examples. In his piercing analysis of 
Chaplin, Eisenstein exposed as a crucial feature of his burlesques a vicious, 
sadistic, humiliating attitude towards children: in Chaplin’s films, children 
are not treated with the usual sweetness: they are teased, mocked, laughed 
at for their failures, food is scattered for them as if they were chickens, 
and so on. The question to ask here, however, is from which point must 



‘CHE vuoir 


I 19 


we look at children so that they appear to us as objects of teasing and 
mocking, not gentle creatures needing protection? The answer, of course, 
is the gaze of the children themselves - only children themselves treat their 
fellows this way; sadistic distance towards children thus implies the 
symbolic identification with the gaze of the children themselves. 

At the opposite extreme, we find the Dickensian admiration of the 
‘good common people’, the imaginary identification with their poor but 
happy, close, unspoiled world, free of the cruel struggle for power and 
money. But (and therein lies the falsity of Dickens) from where is the 
Dickensian gaze peering at the ‘good common people’ so that they appear 
likeable; from where if not from the point of view of the corrupted world 
of power and money? We perceive the same gap in Brueghel’s late idyllic 
paintings of scenes from peasant life (country festivity, reapers during 
midday rest, and so on): Arnold Hauser pointed out that these paintings 
are as far removed as possible from any real plebeian attitude, from any 
mingling with the working classes. Their gaze is, on the contrary, the 
external gaze of the aristocracy upon the peasants’ idyll, not the gaze of 
the peasants themselves upon their life. 

The same goes, of course, for the Stalinist elevation of the dignity of 
the socialist 'ordinary working people’: this idealized image of the working 
class is staged for the gaze of the ruling Party bureaucracy - it serves to 
legitimize their rule. That is why Milos Forman’s Czech films were so 
subversive in mocking small, ordinary people: in showing their undignified 
ways, the futility of their dreams . . . this gesture was far more dangerous 
than making fun of the ruling bureaucracy. Forman did not want to 
destroy the bureaucrat’s imaginary identification; he wisely preferred to 
subvert his symbolic identification by unmasking the spectacle enacted 
for his gaze. 

From i(o] to 1(0) 

This difference between i(o) and 1(0) - between ideal ego and ego-ideal - 
can be further exemplified by the way nicknames function in American 
and Soviet culture. Let us take two individuals, each of whom represents 



120 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


the supreme achievement of these two cultures: Charles ‘Lucky’ Luciano 
and IosifVissarionovich Dzhugashvili ‘Stalin’. In the first case the nickname 
tends to replace the first name (we usually speak simply of ‘Lucky Luciano’), 
while in the second it regularly replaces the family name (‘Iosif 
Vissarionovich Stalin’). In the first case the nickname alludes to some 
extraordinary event which has marked the individual (Charles Luciano 
was ‘lucky’ to have survived the savage torture of his gangster enemies) - 
it alludes, that is, to a positive, descriptive feature which fascinates us; it 
marks something that sticks out on the individual, something that offers 
itself to our gaze, something seen, not the point from which we observe 
the individual. 

However, in the case of Iosif Vissarionovich, it would be entirely erro- 
neous to conclude in a homologous way that ‘Stalin’ (Russian for ‘[made] 
of steel’) alludes to some steely, inexorable characteristic of Stalin himself: 
what is really inexorable and steely are the laws of the historical progress, 
the iron necessity of the disintegration of capitalism and of the passage 
to socialism in the name of which Stalin, this empirical individual, is 
acting - the perspective from which he is observing himself and judging 
his activity. We could say, then, that ‘Stalin’ is the ideal point from which 
‘Iosif Vissarionovich’, this empirical individual, this person of flesh and 
blood, is observing himself so that he appears likeable. 

We find the same split in a late writing of Rousseau, from the time of 
his psychotic delirium, entitled ‘Jean-J deques juge par Rousseau (Jean- Jacques 
judged by Rousseau). It would be possible to conceive this as a draft of the 
Lacanian theory of forename and family name: the first name designates 
the ideal ego, the point of imaginary identification, while the family name 
comes from the father - it designates, as the Name-of-the Father, the point 
of symbolic identification, the agency through which we observe and j udge 
ourselves. The fact that should not be overlooked in this distinction is 
that i[o) is always already subordinated to 1(0): it is the symbolic identi- 
fication (the point from which we are observed) which dominates and 
determines the image, the imaginary form in which we appear to ourselves 
likeable. On the level of formal functioning, this subordination is attested 



‘CHE Vi 101?’ 


121 


by the fact that the nickname which marks (o) also functions as a rigid 
designator, not as a simple description. 

To take another example from the domain of gangsters: if a certain 
individual is nicknamed ‘Scarface’, this does not signify only the simple 
fact that his face is full of scars; it implies at the same time that we are 
dealing with somebody who is designated as ‘Scarface’ and will remain so 
even if, for example, all his scars were removed by plastic surgery. Ideo- 
logical designations function in the same way: ‘Communism’ means (in 
the perspective of the Communist, of course) progress in democracy and 
freedom, even if - on the factual, descriptive level - the political regime 
legitimized as ‘Communist’ produces extremely repressive and tyrannical 
phenomena. To use Kripke’s terms again: ‘Communism’ designates in all 
possible worlds, in all counterfactual situations, ‘democracy-and-freedom’, 
and that is why this connection cannot be refuted empirically, through 
reference to a factual state of things. The analysis of ideology must then 
direct its attention to the points at which names which prima facie signify 
positive descriptive features already function as ‘rigid designators’. 

But why precisely is this difference between how we see ourselves and 
the point from which we are being observed the difference between imag- 
inary and symbolic? In a first approach, we could say that in imaginary 
identification we imitate the other at the level of resemblance - we identify 
ourselves with the image of the other inasmuch as we are ‘like him’, while 
in symbolic identification we identify ourselves with the other precisely 
at a point at which he is inimitable, at the point which eludes resemblance. 
To explain this crucial distinction, let us take Woody Allen’s film Play it 
Again, Sam. The movie starts with the famous final scene from Casablanca, 
but soon afterwards we notice that this was only a ‘film-within-a-film’ 
and that the real s tory concerns a hysterical New York intellectual whose 
sex life is a mess: his wife has just left him; throughout the film, a 
Humphrey Bogart figure appears to him: advising him, making ironic 
comments on his behaviour, and so on. 

The end of the film resolves his relation to the Bogart figure: after 
spending the night with his best friend’s wife, the hero has a dramatic 



122 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


meeting with both of them at the airport; he renounces her and lets her 
go with her husband, thus repeating in real life the final scene from 
Casablanca which opened the film. When his lover says of his parting words 
‘It’s beautiful’, he answers: ‘It’s from Casablanca. I waited my whole life to 
say it.’ After this denouement the Bogart figure appears for the last time, 
saying that by renouncing a woman because of a friendship the hero 
finally ‘got some style’; and no longer needs him. 

How should we read this withdrawal of the Bogart figure? The most 
obvious reading would be the one indicated by the final words of the hero 
to the Bogart figure: ‘I guess the secret is not being you, it’s being me.’ In 
other words, as long as the hero is a weak, frail hysteric he needs an ideal 
ego to identify with, a figure to guide him; but as soon as he finally matures 
and ‘gets some style’ he no longer needs an external point of identification 
because he has achieved identity with himself- he ‘has become himself, 
an autonomous personality. But the words that follow the quoted phrase 
immediately subvert such a reading: ‘True, you’re not too tall and kind 
of ugly, but what the hell, I’m short enough and ugly enough to succeed 
on my own.’ 

In other words, far from ‘outgrowing identification with Bogart’, it is 
when he becomes an ‘autonomous personality’ that the hero really iden- 
tifies with Bogart - more precisely: he becomes an ‘autonomous personality’ 
through his identification with Bogart. The only difference is that now 
identification is no longer imaginary (Bogart as a model to imitate) but, 
at least in its fundamental dimension, symbolic - that is, structural: the 
hero realizes this identification by enacting in reality Bogart’s role from 
Casablanca - by assuming a certain ‘mandate’, by occupying a certain place 
in the intersubjective symbolic network (sacrificing a woman for friend- 
ship . . . ). It is this symbolic identification that dissolves the imaginary 
identification (makes the Bogart figure disappear) - more precisely: that 
radically changes its contents. On the imaginary level, the hero can now 
identify with Bogart through features which are repellent: his smallness, 
his ugliness. 



‘CHE VUOI?’ 


123 


Beyond Identification (Upper Level of the Graph of Desire] 


‘Che vuoi?’ 

This interplay of imaginary and symbolic identification under the domi- 
nation of symbolic identification constitutes the mechanism by means 
of which the subject is integrated into a given socio-symbolic field - the 
way he/she assumes certain ‘mandates’, as was perfectly clear to Lacan 
himself: 

Lacan knew how to extract from Freud’s text the difference between 
ideal ego, marked by him i, and ego-ideal, 1. On the level of I, you can 
without difficulties introduce the social. The I of the ideal can be in a 
superior and legitimate way constructed as a social and ideological 
function. It was moreover Lacan himself who did this in his Ecrits. he 
situates a certain politics in the very foundations of psychology, so that 
the thesis chat all psychology is social can be treated as Lacanian. If not 
on the level at which we are examining i, then at least on the level at 
which we fix I. s 

The only problem is that this ‘square of the circle’ of interpellation, this 
circular movement between symbolic and imaginary identification, never 
comes out without a certain leftover. After every ‘quilting’ of the signifier’s 
chain which retroactively fixes its meaning, there always remains a certain 
gap, an opening which is rendered in the third form of the graph by the 
famous ‘Che vuoi?’ - ‘You’re telling me that, but what do you want with 
it, what are you aiming at?’ 

This question mark arising above the curve of'quilting’ thus indicates 
thepersistenceof a gap between utterance and its enunciation: at the level 
of utterance you’re saying this, but what do you want to tell me with it, through it? (In the established terms of speech act theory, we could of 
course denote this gap as the difference between locution and the illocu- 
tionary force of a given utterance.) And it is at this exact place of the ques- 
tion arising above the utterance, at the place of ‘Why are you telling me 
this?', that we have to locate desire (small d in the graph) in its difference 
to demand: you demand something of me, but what do you really want, 
what are you aiming at through this demand? This split between demand 
and desire is what defines the position of the hysterical subject: according 
to the classic Lacanian formula, the logic of the hysterical demand is ‘I’m 
demanding this ofyou, but what I’m really demanding ofyou is to refute 
my demand because this is not it!’ 

It is this intuition which is behind the ill-famed male chauvinist 
wisdom that ‘woman is a whore’: woman is a whore because we never 
really know what she means - for example, she says ‘No!’ to our advances, 
but we can never be sure that this ‘No!’ does not really mean a double 
‘Yes!’ - an appeal to an even more aggressive approach; in this case, her 
real desire is the very opposite of her demand. In other words, 'woman is 
a whore’ is a vulgar version of the unanswerable Freudian question ‘Was 
will das Weib? [‘What does the woman want?’]. 



'CHE vuoir 


125 


The same intuition is probably at work behind another common 
wisdom, which tells us that politics is also a whore: it is not simply that 
the domain of politics is corrupted, treacherous, and so on; the point is 
rather that every political demand is always caught in a dialectics in which 
it aims at something other than its literal meaning: for example, it can 
function as a provocation intending to be refused (in which case the best 
way to frustrate it is to comply with it, to consent to it without reservation). 
As is well known, this was Lacan’s reproach to the students’ revolt of 15168: 
that is was basically a hysterical rebellion asking for a new Master. 

This ‘Che vuoi ? is perhaps best illustrated by the starting point of 
Hitchcock’s film North by Northwest. To lead the Russian agents off the 
right track, the CIA invents a non-existent agent named George Kaplan. 
Rooms are reserved for him in hotels, phone calls are made in his name, 
plane tickets purchased, and so on - all this to convince the Russian agents 
that Kaplan really exists, when in reality it is just a void, a name without 
a bearer. At the beginning of the film the hero, an ordinary American 
named Roger 0 . Thornhill, finds himself in the lounge of a hotel under 
observation by the Russians because the mysterious Kaplan is supposed 
to be staying there. A hotel clerk enters the lounge saying: ‘Phone call for 
Mr Kaplan. Is Mr Kaplan here?’ Exactly at that same moment, by pure 
coincidence, Thornhill makes a sign to this clerk, wanting to send a 
telegram to his mother. The Russians who are overseeing the scene mistake 
him for Kaplan. When he wants to leave the hotel they kidnap him, take 
him to a lonely villa, and ask him to tell them all about his espionage 
work. Of course, Thornhill knows nothing about it, but his professions 
of innocence pass for a double game. 

Where lies the - one might call it - psychologically convincing nature 
of this scene, based nevertheless on an almost unbelievable coincidence? 
Thornhill’s situation corresponds to a fundamental situation of a human 
being as a being-of-language [parletre , to use Lacan’s condensed writing). 
The subject is always fastened, pinned, to a signifier which represents him 
for the other, and through this pinning he is loaded with a symbolic 
mandate, he is given a place in the intersub jective network of symbolic 



126 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 

relations. The point is that this mandate is ultimately always arbitrary: 
since its nature is performative, it cannot be accounted for by reference 
to the ‘real’ properties and capacities of the subject. So, loaded with this 
mandate, the subject is automatically confronted with a certain ‘Che vuoi? , 
with a question of the Other. The Other is addressing him as if he himself 
possesses the answer to the question of why he has this mandate, but the 
question is, of course, unanswerable. The subject does not know why he 
is occupying this place in the symbolic network. His own answer to this 
‘Che vuoi? of the Other can only be the hysterical question: ‘Why am I 
what I’m supposed to be, why have I this mandate? Why am I [a teacher, 
a master, a king ... or George Kaplan]?’ Briefly: ‘Why am I what you [the big 
Other] are saying that I am?’ 

And the final moment of the psychoanalytic process is, for the 
analysand, precisely when he gets rid of this question - that is, when he 
accepts his being as non-justified by the big Other. This is why psychoanalysis 
began with the interpretation of hysterical symptoms, why its ‘native soil’ 
was the experience of female hysteria: in the last resort, what is hysteria 
if not precisely the effect and testimony of a failed interpellation; what is 
the hysterical question if not an articulation of the incapacity of the subject 
to fulfil the symbolic identification, to assume fully and without restraint 
the symbolic mandate? Lacan formulates the hysterical question as a 
certain ‘Why am I what you’re telling me that I am?’ - that is, which is 
that surplus-object in me that caused the Other to interpellate me, to 
‘hail’ me as . . . [king, master, wife . . . ]?’ 10 The hysterical question opens 
the gap of what is ‘in the subject more than the subject’, of the object in 
subject which resists interpellation - subordination of the subject, its 
inclusion in the symbolic network. 

Perhaps the strongest artistic depiction of this moment of hystericiza- 
tion is Rossetti’s famous painting ‘Ecce Ancilla Domini’, showing Mary at 
the very moment of interpellation - when the Archangel Gabriel reveals 
to her her mission: to conceive immaculately and to give birth to the son 


10 Jacques Lacan, LeSeminaire III Les psychoses, Paris: Seuil, 1981, p. 315. 



‘CHE vuoir 


127 


of God. How does Mary react to this astonishing message, to this original 
‘Hail Mary’? The painting shows her frightened, with a bad conscience, 
withdrawing from the archangel into a corner, as if asking herself ‘Why 
was I selected for this stupid mission? Why me? What does this repulsive 
ghost really want of me?’ The exhausted, pale face and the dark eyeteeth 
are telltale enough: we have before us a woman with a turbulent sex life, 
a licentious sinner - in short, an Eve-like figure; and the painting depicts 
'Eve interpellated into Mary’, her hysterical reaction to it. 

Martin Scorsese’s film The Last Temptation of Christ goes a step further 
in this direction: its theme is simply the hystericization of Jesus Christ 
himself it shows us an ordinary, carnal, passionate man discovering 
gradually, with fascination and horror, that he is the son of God, bearer 
of the dreadful but magnificent mission to redeem humanity through his 
sacrifice. The problem is that he cannot come to terms with this inter- 
pellation: the meaning of his ‘temptations’ lies precisely in the hysterical 
resistance to his mandate, in his doubts about it, in his attempts to evade 
it even when he is already nailed to the cross. 11 


The Jew and Antigone 

We come across this ‘Che vuoi?’ everywhere in the political domain, 
including the ig88 American election struggle in which, after Jesse Jackson’s 
first successes, the press started to ask ‘What does Jackson really want?’ 

11 The other achievement of the film is the final rehabilitation of Judas as the real 
tragic hero of this story: he was the one whose love for Christ was the greatest, and it was 
for this reason that Christ considered him strong enough to fulfil the horrible mission of 
betraying him, thus assuring the accomplishment of Christ’s destiny (the Crucifixion]. The 
tragedy of Judas was that in the name of his dedication to the Cause, he was prepared to risk 
not only his life but even his ‘second life’, his posthumous good name: he knows very well 
that he will enter history as the one who betrayed our Saviour, and he is prepared to endure 
even that for the fulfilment of God’s mission. Jesus used Judas as a means to attain his goal, 
knowing very well that his own suffering would be transformed into a model imitated by 
millions [imitcnio Christi), while Judas's sacrifice is a pure loss without any narcissistic benefit. 
Perhaps he is a little like the faithful victims of the Stalinist monster trials who confessed 
their guilt, proclaimed themselves miserable scum, knowing that by so doing they were 
accomplishing the last and highest service to the Cause of the Revolution. 



128 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


Overtones of racism were easy to detect in this question, because it was 
never raised about other candidates. The conclusion that we are here deal- 
ing with racism is further confirmed by the fact that this ‘Che vuoi?’ erupts 
most violently in the purest, so to say distilled, form of racism, in anti- 
Semitism: in the anti-Semitic perspective, the Jew is precisely a person 
about whom it is never clear 'what he really wants’ - that is, his actions 
are always suspected of being guided by some hidden motives (the Jewish 
conspiracy, world domination and the moral corruption of Gentiles, and 
so on). The case of anti-Semitism also illustrates perfectly why Lacan put, 
at the end of the curve designating the question ‘Che vuoi?’ the formula 
of fantasy ($ 0 o): fantasy is an answer to this ‘Che vuoi?’; it is an attempt to 
fill out the gap of the question with an answer. In the case of anti-Semitism, 
the answer to ‘What does the Jew want?’ is a fantasy of'Jewish conspiracy’: 
a mysterious power of Jews to manipulate events, to pull the strings 
behind the scenes. The crucial point that must be made here on a theo- 
retical level is that fantasy functions as a construction, as an imaginary 
scenario filling out the void, the opening of the desire of the Other, by 
giving us a definite answer to the question 'What does the Other want?’, 
it enables us to evade the unbearable deadlock in which the Other wants 
something from us, but we are at the same time incapable of translating 
this desire of the Other into a positive interpellation, into a mandate 
with which to identify. 

Now we can also understand why it has been the Jews who have been 
chosen as the object of racism par excellence: is not the Jewish God the 
purest embodiment of this ‘Che vuoi?’, of the desire of the Other in its 
terrifying abyss, with the formal prohibition on ‘making an image of God’ 
- on filling out the gap of the Other’s desire with a positive fantasy- 
scenario? Even when, as in the case of Abraham, this God pronounces a 
concrete demand (ordering Abraham to slaughter his own son), it remains 
quite open what he really wants from it: to say that with this horrible 
act Abraham must attest to his infinite trust and devotion to God is 
already an inadmissible simplification. The basic position of a Jewish 
believer is, then, that of Job: not so muchlamentation as incomprehension, 



'CHE VUOI?’ 129 


perplexity, even horror at what the Other (God) wants with the series of 
calamities that are being inflicted upon him. 

This horrified perplexity marks the initial, founding relationship of 
the Jewish believer to God, the pact that God concluded with the Jewish 
people. The fact that Jews perceive themselves as the 'chosen people’ has 
nothing to do with a belief in their superiority; they do not possess any 
special qualities; before the pact with God they were a people like any 
other, no more and no less corrupted, living their ordinary life - when 
suddenly, like a traumatic flash, they came to know (through Moses . . .) 
that the Other had chosen them. The choice was thus not at the beginning, 
it did not determine the ‘original character’ of the Jews - to use Kripkean 
terminology again, it has nothing to do with their descriptive features. 
Why were they chosen, why did they suddenly find themselves occupying 
the position of a debtor towards God? What does God really want from 
them?Theansweris - to repeat the paradoxical formula of the prohibition 
of incest - impossible and prohibited at the same time. 

In other words, the Jewish position could be denoted as a position of 
God beyond - or prior to - the Holy, in contrast to the pagan affirmation of 
the Holy as prior to gods. This strange god that occludes the dimension 
of the Holy is not the ‘philosopher’s god’, the rational manager of the 
universe rendering impossible sacred ecstasy as a means ofcommunication 
with him: it is simply the unbearable point of the desire of the Other, of 
the gap, the void in the Other concealed by the fascinating presence of 
the Holy. Jews persist in this enigma of the Other’s desire, in this traumatic 
point of pure ‘Che vuoi?’ which provokes an unbearable anxiety insofar as 
it cannot be symbolized, ‘gentrified’, through sacrifice or loving devotion. 

It is precisely at this level that we should situate the break between 
Christianity and the J ewish religion - the fact that in contrast to the Jewish 
religion of anxiety, Christianity is a religion of love. The term ‘love’ is to 
be conceived here as articulated in Lacanian theory - that is, in its dimen- 
sion of fundamental deception: we try to fill out the unbearable gap of 
‘Che vuoi?’, the opening of the Other’s desire, by offering ourselves to the 
Other as the object of its desire. In this sense love is, as Lacan pointed out. 



130 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


an interpretation of the desire of the Other: the answer of love is ‘I am what 
is lacking in you; with my devotion to you, with my sacrifice for you, I will 
fill you out, I will complete you.’ The operation of love is therefore double: 
the subject fills in his own lack by offering himself to the other as the object 
filling out the lack in the Other - love’s deception is that this overlapping 
of two lacks annuls lack as such in a mutual completion. 

Christianity is therefore to be conceived as an attempt to ‘gentrify’ the 
Jewish ‘Che vuoi?’ through the act of love and sacrifice. The greatest possible 
sacrifice, the Crucifixion, the death of the son of God, is precisely the final 
proof that God-Father loves us with an all-embracing, infinite love, thereby 
delivering us from the anxiety of ‘Che vuoi?’. The Passion of Christ, this 
fascinating image which cancels all other images, this fantasy-scenario 
which condenses all the libidinal economy of the Christian religion, 
acquires its meaning only against the background of the unbearable 
enigma of the desire of the Other (God). 

We are, of course, far from implying that Christianity entails a kind of 
return to the pagan relationship of man to god: that this is not so is already 
attested by the fact that, contrary to superficial appearance, Christianity 
follows the Jewish religion in occluding the dimension of the Holy. What 
we do find in Christianity is something of quite another order: the idea 
of the saint, which is the exact opposite of the priest in service of the Holy. 
The priest is a ‘functionary of the Holy’; there is no Holy without its offi- 
cials, without the bureaucratic machinery supporting it, organizing its 
ritual, from the Aztecs’ official of human sacrifice to the modern sacred 
state or army rituals. The saint, on the contrary, occupies the place of objet 
petit a, of pure object, of somebody undergoing radical subjective destitu- 
tion. He enacts no ritual, he conjures nothing, he just persists in his inert 
presence. 

We can now understand why Lacan saw in Antigone a forerunner of 
Christ’s sacrifice: in her persistence, Antigone is a saint, definitely not 
priestess. This is why we must oppose all attempts to domesticate her, to 
tame her by concealing the frightening strangeness, ‘inhumanity’, a- 
patheticcixaizctci of her figure, making of her a gentle protectress of family 



■CHE VUOI?' 


131 


and household who evokes our compassion and offers herself as a point 
of identification. In Sophocles’ Antigone, the figure with which we can 
identify is her sister Ismene - kind, considerate, sensitive, prepared to give 
way and compromise, pathetic, ‘human’, in contrast to Antigone, who 
goes to the limit, who ‘doesn’t give way on her desire’ (Lacan) and becomes, 
in this persistence in the ‘death drive’, in the being-towards-death, fright- 
eningly ruthless, exempted from the circle ofeveryday feelings and consid- 
erations, passions and fears. In other words, it is Antigone herself who 
necessarily evokes in us, pathetic everyday compassionate creatures, the 
question ‘What does she really want?’, the question which precludes any 
identification with her. 

In European literature, the couple Antigone-Ismene repeats itself in 
de Sade’s work, in the shape of the couple Juliette-Justine: here, Justine 
is likewise a pathetic victim, as opposed to Juliette, this a-pathetic rake 
who also ‘doesn’t give way on her desire’. Finally, why should we not 
locate a third version of the couple Antigone-Ismene in Margaretha von 
Trotta’s film The Times of Plumb, in the couple of the RAF (Red Army 
Fractionj-terrorist (based on the model of Gudrun Ensslin) and her 
pathetic-compassionate sister who ‘tries to understand her’ and from 
whose viewpoint the story is told. (The Schlondorf episode in the 
omnibus film Germany in Autumn was based on the parallel between 
Antigone and Gudrun Ensslin.) 

Three at first sight totally incompatible figures: the dignified Antigone 
sacrificing herself for her brother’s memory; the promiscuous Juliette 
giving herself over to enjoyment beyond all limits (that is precisely beyond 
the limit at which enjoyment still gives pleasure); the fanatical-ascetic 
Gudrun wanting to awaken the world from its everyday pleasures and 
routines with her terrorist acts - Lacan enables us to recognize in all three 
the same ethical position, that of ‘not giving way on one’s desire’. That is 
why all three of them provoke the same ‘Che vuoi?’, the same ‘What do 
they really want?’: Antigone with her obstinate persistence, Juliette with 
her a-pathetic promiscuity, Gudrun with her ‘senseless’ terrorist acts: all 
three putin question theGood embodied in the State and common morals. 



132 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


Fantasy as a screen for the desire of the Other 

Fantasy appears, then, as an answer to ‘Che vuoi?’ , to the unbearable enigma 
of the desire of the Other, of the lack in the Other, but it is at the same 
time fantasy itself which, so to speak, provides the co-ordinates of our 
desire - which constructs the frame enabling us to desire something. The 
usual definition of fantasy (‘an imagined scenario representing the real- 
ization of desire’) is therefore somewhat misleading, or at least ambiguous: 
in the fantasy-scene the desire is not fulfilled, ‘satisfied’, but constituted 
(given its objects, and so on) - through fantasy, we learn ‘how to desire In 
this intermediate position lies the paradox of fantasy: it is the frame 
co-ordinating our desire, but at the same time a defence against ‘Che vuoi?’, 
a screen concealing the gap, the abyss of the desire of the O ther. Sharpening 
the paradox to its utmost - to tautology - we could say that desire itself is 
a defence against desire, the desire structured through fantasy is a defence 
against the desire of the Other, against this ‘pure’, trans-phantasmic desire 
(i.e. the ‘death drive’ in its pure form). 

We can now see why the maxim ofpsychoanalytic ethics as formulated 
by Lacan (‘not to give way on one’s desire’) coincides with the closing 
moment of the psychoanalytic process, the ‘going through the fantasy’: 
the desire with regard to which we must not ‘give way’ is not the desire 
supported by fantasy but the desire of the Other beyond fantasy. ‘Not to 
give way on desire’ implies a radical renunciation of all the richness of 
desires based upon fantasy-scenarios. In the psychoanalytic process, this 
desire of the Other assumes the form of the analyst's desire: the analysand 
tries at first to evade its abyss by means of transference - that is, by means 
of offering himself as the object of the analyst's love; the ‘dissolution of 
transference’ takes place when the analysand renounces filling out the 
void, the lack in the Other. (We find a logic homologous to the paradox 
of desire as defence against desire in the Lacanian thesis that the cause is 
always the cause of something which goes wrong, which is amiss [the 
French ‘5a cloche’: it limps]: it could be said that causality - the usual, 
‘normal’ linear chain of causes - is a defence against the cause with which 



'CHE vuoir 


133 


we are concerned in psychoanalysis; this cause appears precisely where 
‘normal’ causality fails, breaks down. For example, when we make a slip 
of the tongue, when we say something other than what we intended to 
say - that is, when the causal chain regulating our ‘normal’ speech activity 
breaks down - at this point that question of the cause is imposed upon 
us: ‘Why did it happen?’) 

The way fantasy functions can be explained through reference to Kant’s 
Critique of Pure Reason: the role of fantasy in the economy of desire is homol- 
ogous to that of transcendental schematism in the process of knowledge . 12 
In Kant, transcendental schematism is a mediator, an intermediary agency 
between empirical content (contingent, inner-worldly, empirical objects 
of experience) and the network of transcendental categories: it is the name 
of the mechanism through which empirical objects are included in the 
network of transcendental categories which determines the way we 
perceive and conceive them (as substances with properties, submitted to 
causal links, and so on). A homologous mechanism is at work with fantasy: 
how does an empirical, positively given object become an object of desire; 
how does it begin to contain some X, some unknown quality, something 
which is ‘in it more than it’ and makes it worthy of our desire? By entering 
the framework of fantasy, by being included in a fantasy-scene which gives 
consistency to the subject’s desire. 

Let us take Hitchcock's Rear Window, the window through which James 
Stewart, disabled and confined to a wheelchair, gazes continually is clearly 
a fantasy-window - his desire is fascinated by what he can see through 
the window. And the problem of the unfortunate Grace Kelly is that by 
proposing to him she acts as an obstacle, a stain disturbing his view 
through the window, instead of fascinating him with her beauty. How 
does she succeed, finally, in becoming worthy of his desire? By literally 
entering the frame of his fantasy; by crossing the courtyard and appearing 
‘on the other side’ where he can see her through thewindow. When Stewart 
sees her in the murderer’s apartment his gaze is immediately fascinated, 


12 Bernard Baas, ‘Les de'sir pur’, Ornicar? 43, 1987. 



134 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


greedy, desirous of her: she has found her place in his fantasy-space. This 
would be Lacan’s ‘male chauvinist’ lesson: man can relate to woman only 
in so far as she enters the frame of his fantasy. 

At a certain naive level, this is not unknown to the psychoanalytic doxa 
which claims that every man seeks, in a woman he chooses as his sexual 
partner, his mother’s substitute: a man falls in love with a woman when 
some feature of her reminds him of his mother. The only thing Lacan adds 
to this traditional view is to emphasize its usually overlooked negative 
dimension: in fantasy, mother is reduced to a limited set of (symbolic) 
features; as soon as an object too close to the Mother-Thing - an object 
which is not linked with the maternal Thing only through certain reduced 
features but is immediately attached to it - appears in the fantasy-frame, 
the desire is suffocated in incestuous claustrophobia. Here we again 
encounter the paradoxical intermediate role of fantasy: it is a construction 
enabling us to seek maternal substitutes, but at the same time a screen 
shielding us from getting too close to the maternal Thing - keeping us 
at a distance from it. This is why it would be wrong to conclude that any 
empirical, positively given object could take its place in the fantasy-frame, 
thereby starting to function as an object of desire: some objects (those 
which are too close to the traumatic Thing) are definitely excluded from 
it; if, by any chance, they intrude into the fantasy-space, the effect is 
extremely disturbing and disgusting: the fantasy loses its fascinating 
power and changes into a nauseating object 

Again Hitchcock, this time in Vertigo, offers us an example of such a 
transformation: the hero - James Stewart again - is passionately in love 
with Madeleine and follows her to a museum where she admires the 
portrait of Charlotte, a long-dead woman with whom Madeleine iden- 
tifies: to play a practical joke on him, his everyday maternal friend, an 
amateur painter, sets up an unpleasant surprise for him: she paints an 
exact copy of Charlotte’s portrait with white lace dress, a bunch of red 
flowers in her lap, and so on, but instead of Charlotte’s fatally beautiful 
face she puts her own common face with spectacles . . . the effect is 
terrifying: depressive, broken and disgusted, Stewart leaves her. (We find 



‘CHE VUOI?’ 


135 


the same procedure in Hitchcock’s Rebecca, where Joan Fontaine - to 
charm her husband, whom she supposes to be still in love with his late 
wife, Rebecca - appears at a formal reception in a gown Rebecca once 
wore on a similar occasion - the effect is again grotesque and the husband 
drives her furiously away . . . ) 

It is clear, then, why Lacan developed his graph of desire apropos of 
Shakespeare’s Hamlet: is not Hamlet, in the last analysis, a drama of failed 
interpellation ? At the beginning we have interpellation in its pure form: 
the ghost of the father-king interpellates Hamlet-individual into subject 
- that is, Hamlet recognizes himself as the addressee of the imposed 
mandate or mission (to avenge his father’s murder); but the father’s ghost 
enigmatically supplements his command with the request that Hamlet 
should not in any way harm his mother. And what prevents Hamlet from 
acting, from accomplishing the imposed revenge, is precisely the confronta- 
tion with the ‘Che vuoi?’ of the desire of the Other: the key scene of the 
whole drama is the long dialogue between Hamlet and his mother, in 
which he is seized by doubt as to his mother’s desire - what does she really 
want? What if she really enjoys her filthy, promiscuous relationship with 
his uncle? Hamlet is therefore hindered not by indecision as to his own 
desire; it is not that ‘he doesn’t know what he really wants’ - he knows 
that very clearly: he wants to avenge his father - what hinders him is 
doubt concerning the desire of the other, the confrontation of a certain ‘Che 
vuoi?’ which announces the abyss of some terrifying, filthy enjoyment. If 
the Name-of-the-Father functions as the agency of interpellation, of 
symbolic identification, the mother's desire, with its fathomless ‘Che vuoi?’, 
marks a certain limit at which every interpellation necessarily fails. 


The inconsistent Other q/jouissance 

In this way we have already reached the fourth, last, complete form of 
the graph of desire, because what is added in this last form is a new 
vector of enjoyment [ jouissance ] intersecting the vector of the symbol- 
ically structured desire: 



136 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


Completed Graph 



The complete graph is thus divided into two levels, which can be designated 
as the level of meaning and the level of enjoyment. The problem of the 
first (lower) level is how the intersection of the signifying chain and of a 
mythical intention (A) produces the effect of meaning, with all its internal 
articulation: the retroactive character of meaning in so far as it is the 
function of the big Other - in so far, that is, as it is conditioned by the 
place of the Other, the signifier’s battery (j(O)); the imaginary [ 1 ( 0 ]] and 
the symbolic (1(0)) - identification of the subject based on this retroactive 
production of meaning, and so on. The problem of the second (upper) level 
is what happens when this very field of the signifier’s order, of the big 
Other, is perforated, penetrated by a pre-symbolic (real) stream of enjoy- 
ment - what happens when the pre-symbolic ‘substance’, the body as 
materialized, incarnated enjoyment, becomes enmeshed in the signifier’s 
network. 

Its general result is clear: by being filtered through the sieve of the 
signifier, the body is submitted to castration, enjoyment is evacuated from 
it, the body survives as dismembered, mortified. In other words, the order 
of the signifier (the big Other) and that of enjoyment (the Thing as its 
embodiment) are radically heterogeneous, inconsistent; any accordance 



'CHE VUOl?’ 


137 


between them is structurally impossible. This is why we find on the left- 
hand side of the upper level of the graph - at the first point of intersection 
between enjoyment and signifier, S(0) - the signifier of the lack in the 
Other, of the inconsistency of the Other: as soon as the field of the signifier 
is penetrated by enjoyment it becomes inconsistent, porous, perforated - 
the enjoyment is what cannot be symbolized, its presence in the field of 
the signifier can be detected only through the holes and inconsistencies 
of this field, so the only possible signifier of enjoyment is the signifier of 
the lack in the Other, the signifier of its inconsistency. 

Today, it is acommonplace that the Lacanian subject is divided, crossed- 
out, identical to a lack in a signifying chain. However, the most radical 
dimension of Lacanian theory lies not in recognizing this fact but in real- 
izing that the big Other, the symbolic order itself, is also barre, crossed- 
out, by a fundamental impossibility, structured around an impossible/ 
traumatic kernel, around a central lack. Without this lack in the Other, 
the Other would be a closed structure and the only possibility open to the 
subject would be his radical alienation in the Other. So it is precisely this 
lack in the Other which enables the subject to achieve a kind of ‘de- 
alienation’ called by Lacan separation: not in the sense that the subject 
experiences that now he is separated forever from the object by the barrier 
of language, but that the object is separated from the Other itself, that the 
Other itself ‘hasn’t got if, hasn’t got the final answer - that is to say, is 
in itself blocked, desiring; that there is also a desire of the Other. This lack 
in the Other gives the subject - so to speak - a breathing space, it enables 
him to avoid the total alienation in the signifier not by filling out his lack 
but by allowing him to identify himself his own lack, with the lack in 
the Other. 

The three levels of the descending vector on the left side of the graph 
can thus be conceived in view of the logic that regulates their succession. 
First, we have S(0]: the mark of the lack of the Other, of the inconsistency 
of the symbolic order when it is penetrated by jouissance: then S Oo, the 
formula of fantasy: the function of fantasy is to serve as a screen concealing 
this inconsistency; finally j(0), the effect of the signification as dominated 



138 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


by fantasy: fantasy functions as ‘absolute signification’ (Lacan]; it consti- 
tutes the frame through which we experience the world as consistent and 
meaningful - the a priori space within which the particular effects of 
signification take place. 

The last point to be clarified is why we find on the other, right-hand 
point of intersection between enjoyment and signifier the formula of drive 
(?0D)? We have already said that the signifier dismembers the body, that 
it evacuates enjoyment from the body, but this ‘evacuation’ Qacques-Alain 
Miller] is never fully accomplished; scattered around the desert of the 
symbolic Other, there are always some leftovers, oases of enjoyment, so- 
called ‘erogenous zones’, fragments still penetrated with enjoyment - and 
it is precisely these remnants to which Freudian drive is tied: it circulates, 
it pulses around them. These erogenous zones are designated with D 
(symbolic demand] because there is nothing ‘natural’, ‘biological’, in them: 
which part of the body will survive the ‘evacuation of enjoyment’ is deter- 
mined not by physiology but by the way the body has been dissected 
through the signifier (as is confirmed by those hysterical symptoms in 
which the parts of the body from which enjoyment is ‘normally’ evacuated 
become again eroticized - neck, nose . . .]. 

Perhaps we should take a risk and read ?0D retroactively, from Lacan’s 
later theoretical development, as the formula of sinthome : a particular 
signifying formation which is immediately permeated with enjoyment - 
that is, the impossible junction of enjoyment with the signifier. Such a 
reading gives us a key to the upper level, to the upper square of the graph 
of desire in its opposition to the lower square: instead of imaginary iden- 
tification (the relation between imaginary ego and its constitutive image, 
its ideal ego] we have here desire (d) supported by fantasy (? 0 o); the function 
of fantasy is to fill the opening in the Other, to conceal its inconsistency 
- as for instance the fascinating presence of some sexual scenario serving 
as a screen to mask the impossibility of the sexual relationship. Fantasy 
conceals the fact that the Other, the symbolic order, is structured around 
some traumatic impossibility, around something which cannot be symbol- 
ized - i.e. the real o(jouissance : through fantasy Jouissance is domesticated, 



■CHE VUOI?' 


139 


‘gentrified’ - so what happens with desire after we ‘traverse’ fantasy? 
Lacan’s answer, in the last pages of his Seminar XI, is drive, ultimately the 
death drive: ‘beyond fantasy’ there is no yearning or any kindred sublime 
phenomenon, ‘beyond fantasy’ we find only drive, its pulsation around 
the sinthome. ‘Going-through-the-fantasy’ is therefore strictly correlative 
to identification with a sinthome. 


‘Going through’ the social fantasy 

In this way, we could read the whole upper (second) level of the graph as 
designating the dimension ‘beyond interpellation’: the impossible ‘square 
of the circle’ of symbolic and/or imaginary identification never results in 
the absence of any remainder, there is always a leftover which opens the 
space for desire and makes the Other (the symbolic order) inconsistent, 
with fantasy as an attempt to overcome, to conceal this inconsistency, this 
gap in the Other. And now we can finally return to the problematics of 
ideology: the crucial weakness of hitherto ‘(post-)structuralist’ essays in 
the theory of ideology descending from the Althusserian theory of inter- 
pellation was to limit themselves to the lower level, to the lower square 
of Lacan’s graph of desire - to aim at grasping the efficiency of an ideology 
exclusively through the mechanisms of imaginary and symbolic identifi- 
cation. The dimension ‘beyond interpellation’ which was thus left out has 
nothing to do with some kind of irreducible dispersion and plurality of 
the signifying process - with the fact that the metonymic sliding always 
subverts every fixation of meaning, every ‘quilting’ of the floating signifiets 
(as it would appear in a ‘post-structuralist’ perspective). ‘Beyond inter- 
pellation’ is the square of desire, fantasy, lack in the Other and drive 
pulsating around some unbearable surplus-enjoyment. 

What does this mean for the theory of ideology? At first sight it could 
seem that what is pertinent in an analysis of ideology is only the way it 
functions as a discourse, the way the series o f floating signifiers is totalized, 
transformed into a unified field through the intervention of certain 
‘nodal points’. Briefly: the way the discursive mechanisms constitute the 



HO THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


field of ideological meaning; in this perspective theenjoyment-in-signifier 
would be simply pre-ideological, irrelevant for ideology as a social bond. 
But the case of so-called ‘totalitarianism’ demonstrates what applies to 
every ideology, to ideology as such: the last support of the ideological effect 
(of the way an ideological network of signifiers ‘holds’ us) is the non- 
sensical, pre-ideological kernel of enjoyment. In ideology ‘all is not ideology 
(that is, ideological meaning)’, but it is this very surplus which is the last 
support of ideology. That is why we could say that there are also two 
complementary procedures of the ‘criticism of ideology’: 

• one is discursive, the ‘symptomal reading’ of the ideological text bring- 
ing about the ‘deconstruction’ of the spontaneous experience of its 
meaning - that is, demonstrating how a given ideological field is a 
result of a montage of heterogeneous ‘floating signifiers’, of their 
totalization through the intervention of certain ‘nodal points’; 

• the other aims at extracting the kernel of enjoyment, at articulating 
the way in which - beyond the field of meaning but at the same 
time internal to it - an ideology implies, manipulates, produces a 
pre-ideological enjoyment structured in fantasy. 

To exemplify this necessity of supplementing the analysis of discourse 
with the logic of enjoyment we have only to look again at the special case 
of ideology, which is perhaps the purest incarnation of ideology as such: 
anti-Semitism. To put it bluntly: ‘Society doesn’t exist’, and the Jew is its 
symptom. 

On the level of discourse analysis, it is not difficult to articulate the 
network of symbolic overdetermination invested in the figure of the Jew. 
First, there is displacement: the basic trick of anti-Semitism is to displace 
social antagonism into antagonism between the sound social texture, 
social body, and the Jew as the force corroding it, the force of corruption. 
Thus it is not society itself which is ‘impossible’, based on antagonism - 
the source of corruption is located in a particular entity, the Jew. This 
displacement is made possible by the association of Jews with financial 



‘CHE VUOI?’ 


141 


dealings: the source o f exploitation and of class antagonism is located not 
in the basic relation between the working and ruling classes but in the relation 
between the ‘productive’ forces (workers, organizers of production . . . ) 
and the merchants who exploit the ‘productive’ classes, replacing organic 
co-operation with class struggle. 

This displacement is, of course, supported by condensation: the figure 
of the Jew condenses opposing features, features associated with lower and 
upper classes: Jews are supposed to be dirty and intellectual, voluptuous 
and impotent, and so on. What gives energy, so to speak, to the displace- 
ment is therefore the way the figure of the Jew condenses a series of 
heterogeneous antagonisms: economic (Jew as profiteer J, political (Jew as 
schemer, retainer of a secret powerj, moral-religious (Jew as corrupt anti- 
Christian J, sexual (Jew as seducer of our innocent girlsj ... In short, it can 
easily be shown how the figure of the Jew is a symptom in the sense of a 
coded message, a cypher, a disfigured representation of social antagonism; 
by undoing this work of displacement/condensation, we can determine 
its meaning. 

But this logic of metaphoric-metonymic displacement is not sufficient 
to explain how the figure of the Jew captures our desire; to penetrate its 
fascinating force, we must take into account the way ‘Jew’ enters the frame- 
work of fantasy structuring our enjoyment. Fantasy is basically a scenario 
filling out the empty space of a fundamental impossibility, a screen mask- 
ing a void. ‘There is no sexual relationship’, and this impossibility is filled 
out by the fascinating fantasy-scenario - that is why fantasy is, in the last 
resort, always a fantasy of the sexual relationship, a staging of it. As such, 
fantasy is not to be interpreted, only ‘traversed’: all we have to do is 
experience how there is nothing ‘behind’ it, and how fantasy masks 
precisely this ‘nothing’. (But there is a lot behind a symptom, a whole 
network of symbolic overdetermination, which is why the symptom 
involves its interpretation.} 

It is now clear how we can use this notion of fantasy in the domain of 
ideology proper: here also ‘there is no class relationship’, society is always 
traversed by an antagonistic split which cannot be integrated into symbolic 



142 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


order. And the stake of social-ideological fantasy is to construct a vision 
of society which does exist, a society which is not split by an antagonistic 
division, a society in which the relation between its parts is organic, 
complementary. The clearest case is, of course, the corporatist vision of 
Society as an organic Whole, a social Body in which the different classes 
are like extremities, members each contributing to the Whole according 
to their function - we may say that ‘Society as a corporate Body’ is the 
fundamental ideological fantasy. How then do we take account of the 
distance between this corporatist vision and the factual society split by 
antagonistic struggles? The answer is, of course, the Jew: an external 
element, a foreign body introducing corruption into the sound social 
fabric. In short, ‘Jew’ is a fetish which simultaneously denies and embodies 
the structural impossibility of ‘Society’: it is as if in the figure of the Jew 
this impossibility had acquired a positive, palpable existence - and that 
is why it marks the eruption of enjoyment in the social field. 

The notion of social fantasy is therefore a necessary counterpart to the 
concept of antagonism: fantasy is precisely the way the antagonistic fissure 
is masked. In other words, fantasy is a means for an ideology to take its own 
failure into account in advance. The thesis of Laclau and Mouffe that ‘Society 
doesn’t exist’, that the Social is always an inconsistent field structured 
around a constitutive impossibility, traversed by a central ‘antagonism’ - 
this thesis implies that every process of identification conferring on us a 
fixed socio-symbolic identity is ultimately doomed to fail. The function 
of ideological fantasy is to mask this inconsistency, the fact that ‘Society 
doesn't exist’, and thus to compensate us for the failed identification. 

The ‘Jew’ is the means, for Fascism, of taking into account, of repre- 
senting its own impossibility: in its positive presence, it is only the embod- 
iment of the ultimate impossibility of the totalitarian project - of its 
immanent limit. This is why it is insufficient to designate the totalitarian 
project as impossible, utopian, wanting to establish a totally transparent 
and homogeneous society - the problem is that in a way, totalitarian 
ideology knows it, recognizes it in advance: in the figure of the ‘Jew’ it 
includes this knowledge in its edifice. The whole Fascist ideology is 



'CHE VUOI?’ 


143 


structured as a struggle against the element which holds the place of the 
immanent impossibility of the very Fascist project: the ‘Jew’ is nothing 
but a fetishistic embodiment of a certain fundamental blockage. 

The ‘criticism of ideology’ must therefore invert the linking of causality 
as perceived by the totalitarian gaze: far from being the positive cause of 
social antagonism, the ‘Jew’ is just the embodiment of a certain blockage 
- of the impossibility which prevents the society from achieving its full 
identity as a closed, homogeneous totality. Far from being the positive 
cause of social negativity, the Jew’ is a point at which social negativity as such 
assumes positive existence. In this way we can articulate another formula of 
the basic procedure of the ‘criticism of ideology’, supplementing the one 
given above: to detect, in a given ideological edifice, the element which 
represents within it its own impossibility. Society is not prevented from 
achieving its full identity because ofjews: it is prevented by its own antag- 
onistic nature, by its own immanent blockage, and it ‘projects’ this internal 
negativity into the figure of the ‘Jew’. In other words, what is excluded 
from the Symbolic (from the frame of the corporatist socio-symbolic order] 
returns in the Real as a paranoid construction of the ‘Jew’.' 3 

We can also see now how ‘going through’ the social fantasy is likewise 
correlative to identification with a symp tom. Jews are clearly a social symp- 
tom: the point at which the immanent social antagonism assumes a posi- 
tive form, erupts on to the social surface, the point at which it becomes 
obvious that society ‘doesn’t work’, that the social mechanism ‘creaks’. If 
we look at it through the frame of (corporatist] fantasy, the ‘Jew’ appears 
as an intruder who introduces from outside disorder, decomposition and 

13 Here we could use the distinction elaborated by Kovel ( White Racism, London: Free 
Association Books, 1988) between dominative and aversive racism. In Nazi ideology, all 
human races form a hierarchical, harmonious Whole (the ‘destiny’ of the Aryans at the 
top is to rule, while the Blacks, Chinese, and others have to serve) all races except the Jews. 
they have no proper place; their very ‘identity’ is a fake, it consists in trespassing the 
frontiers, in introducing unrest, antagonism, in destabilizing the social fabric. As such, 
Jews plot with other races and prevent them from putting up with their proper place 
they function as a hidden Master aiming at world domination: they are a counter image 
of the Aryans themselves, a kind of negative, perverted double; this is why they must be 
exterminated, while other races have only to be forced to occupy their proper place. 



144 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


corruption of the social edifice - it appears as an outward positive cause 
whose elimination would enable us to restore order, stability and identity. 
But in ‘going through the fantasy’ we must in the same move identify 
with the symptom: we must recognize in the properties attributed to ‘Jew’ 
the necessary product of our very social system; we must recognize in the 
‘excesses’ attributed to ‘Jews’ the truth about ourselves. 

Precisely because of such a notion of social ‘excesses’, Lacan pointed out 
that it was Marx who invented the symptom: Marx’s great achievement 
was to demonstrate how all phenomena which appear to everyday bourgeois 
consciousness as simple deviations, contingent deformations and degen- 
erations of the ‘normal’ functioning of society (economic crises, wars, and 
so on), and as such abolishable through amelioration of the system, are 
necessary products of the system itself- the points at which the ‘truth’, 
the immanent antagonistic character of the system, erupts. To ‘identify 
with a symptom’ means to recognize in the ‘excesses’, in the disruptions 
of the ‘normal’ way of things, the key offering us access to its true 
functioning. This is similar to Freud’s view that the keys to the func- 
tioning of the human mind were dreams, slips of the tongue, and similar 
‘abnormal’ phenomena. 



4 You Only Die Twice 


Between the two deaths 

The connection between the death drive and the symbolic order is a 
constant with Lacan, but we can differentiate the various stages of his 
teaching precisely by reference to the different modes of articulation of 
the death drive and the signifier: 

• In the first period (the first seminar, The Function and the Field of 
Speech and Language . . it is the Hegelian phenomenological idea 
that the word is a death, a murder of a thing: as soon as the reality 
is symbolized, caught in a symbolic network, the thing itself is more 
present in a word, in its concept, than in its immediate physical 
reality. More precisely, we cannot return to the immediate reality: 
even if we turn from the word to the thing - from the word ‘table’ 
to the table in its physical reality, for example - the appearance of 
the table itself is already marked with a certain lack - to know what 
a table really is, what it means, we must have recourse to the word 
which implies an absence of the thing. 

• In the second period (the Lacanian reading ofPoe’s ‘Purloined Letter’), 
the accent is shifted from the word, speech, to language as a 
synchronic structure, a senseless autonomous mechanism which 
produces meaning as its effect. If, in the first period, the Lacanian 



146 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


concept of language is still basically a phenomenological one (Lacan 
constantly repeats that the field of psychoanalysis is the field of 
meaning, la signification), here we have a ‘structuralist’ conception 
of language as a differential system of elements. The death drive is 
now identified with the symbolic order itself in Lacan’s own words, 
it is ‘nothing but a mask of the symbolic order’. The main thing 
here is the opposition between the imaginary level of the experience 
of meaning and the meaningless signifier/signifying mechanism 
producing it. The imaginary level is governed by the pleasure prin- 
ciple, it is striving for a homeostatic balance, and the symbolic order 
in its blind automatism is always troubling this homeostasis: it is 
‘beyond the pleasure principle’. When the human being is caught in 
the signifier’s network, this network has a mortifying effect on him; 
he becomes part of a strange automatic order disturbing his natural 
homeostatic balance (through compulsive repetition, for example], 

• In the third period, in which the main accent of Lacan’s teaching is 
put on the Real as impossible, the death drive again radically 
changes its signification. This change can be most easily detected 
through the relationship between the pleasure principle and the 
symbolic order. 

Until the end of 15150s, the pleasure principle was identified with 
the imaginary level: the symbolic order was conceived as the realm 
‘beyond the pleasure principle’. But starting from the late 1950s (the 
Seminar on The Ethic of Psychoanalysis), it is, in contrast, the symbolic 
order itself which is identified with the pleasure principle: the 
unconscious ‘structured like a language’, its ‘primary process’ of 
metonymic-metaphoric displacement, is governed by the pleasure 
principle; what lies beyond is not the symbolic order but a real kernel, 
a traumatic core. To designate it, Lacan uses a Freudian term: das 
Ding, the Thing as an incarnation of the impossible jouissance (the 
term Thing is to be taken here with all the connotations it possesses 
in the domain of horror science fiction: the ‘alien’ from the film of 
the same name is a pre-symbolic, maternal Thing par excellence). 



YOU ONLY DIE TWICE 


147 


The symbolic order is striving for a homeostatic balance, but 
there is in its kernel, at its very centre, some strange, traumatic 
element which cannot be symbolized, integrated into the symbolic 
order - theThing. Lacan coined a neologism for it: I’extirrdte - external 
intimacy, which served as a title for one of Jacques-Alain Miller’s 
Seminars. And what, at this level, is the death drive? Exactly the 
opposite of the symbolic order: the possibility of the ‘second death’, 
the radical annihilation of the symbolic texture through which 
so-called reality is constituted. The very existence of the symbolic 
order implies a possibility of its radical effacement, of ‘symbolic 
death’ - not the death of the so-called ‘real object’ in its symbol, but 
the obliteration of the signifying network itself 

This distinction between the different stages of Lacan’s teaching is not of 
purely theoretical interest; it has very definite consequences for the 
determination of the final moment of the psychoanalytic cure: 

• In the first period, in which the emphasis is on the word as a medium 
of the intersubjective recognition of desire, the symptoms are 
conceived as white spots, non-symbolized imaginary elements of 
the history of the subject, and the process of analysis is that of their 
symbolization - of their integration into the symbolic universe of 
the subject: the analysis gives meaning, retroactively, to what was 
in the beginning a meaningless trace. So the final moment of the 
analysis is reached when the subject is able to narrate to the Other 
his own history in its continuity; when his desire is integrated, 
recognized in ‘full speech [parole pleine]’. 

• In the second period, in which the symbolic order is conceived as 
having a mortifying effect on the subject, as imposing on him a 
traumatic loss - and the name of this loss, of this lack, is of course 
symbolic castration - the final moment of analysis is reached when 
the subject is ready to accept this fundamental loss, to consent to 
symbolic castration as a price to be paid for access to his desire. 



148 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


• In the third period we have the big Other, the symbolic order, with 
a traumatic element at its very heart; and in Lacanian theory the 
fantasy is conceived as a construction allowing the subject to come 
to terms with this traumatic kernel. At this level, the final moment 
of the analysis is defined as ‘going through the fantasy [la traversee 
dn fantasme ]’: not its symbolic interpretation but the experience of 
the fact that the fantasy-object, by its fascinating presence, is merely 
filling out a lack, a void in the Other. There is nothing ‘behind' the 
fantasy; the fantasy is a construction whose function is to hide this 
void, this ‘nothing’ - that is, the lack in the Other. 

The crucial element of this third period of Lacan’s teaching is therefore 
the shift of emphasis from the symbolic to the Real. To exemplify it, let 
us take the notion of the ‘knowledge in the Real’: the idea that nature 
knows its own laws and behaves accordingly. We all know the classical, 
archetypal cartoon scene: a cat approaches the edge of the precipice but 
she does not stop, she proceeds calmly, and although she is already hanging 
in the air, without ground under her feet, she does not fall - when does 
she fall? The moment she looks down and becomes aware of the fact that 
she is hanging in the air. The point of this nonsense accident is that when 
the cat is walking slowly in the air, it is as if the Real has for a moment 
forgotten its knowledge: when the cat finally looks down, she remembers 
that she must follow the laws of nature and falls. This is basically the 
same logic as in the already mentioned dream, reported in Freud’s Inter- 
pretation of Breams, of a father who does not know that he is dead: the 
point is again that because he does not know that he is dead, he continues 
to live - he must be reminded of his death or, to give this situation a 
comical twist, he is still living because he has forgotten to die. That is how 
the phrase memento men should be read: don’t forget to die! 

This brings us back to the distinction between the two deaths: because 
of lack of knowledge, the father in Freud’s dream is still living, although 
he is already dead. In a way, everybody must die twice. That is the Hegelian 
theory of repetition in history: when Napoleon lost for the first time and 



YOU ONLY DIE TWICE 


149 


was consigned to Elba, he did not know that he was already dead, that his 
historical role was finished, and he had to be reminded of it through his 
second defeat at Waterloo - at this point, when he died for the second 
time, he was really dead. 

The stimulus for this idea of a second death came from the Marquis 
de Sade: the Sadeian notion of a radical, absolute crime that liberates 
nature’s creative force, as elaborated in the Pope’s long speech in the fifth 
volume of Juliette, implies a distinction between the two deaths: natural 
death, which is a part of the natural cycle of generation and corruption, 
of nature’s continual transformation, and absolute death - the destruction, 
the eradication, of the cycle itself which then liberates nature from its 
own laws and opens the way for the creation of new forms of life extuhilo. 
This difference between the two deaths can be linked with the Sadeian 
fantasy revealed by the fact that in his work his victim is, in a certain 
sense, indestructible: she can be endlessly tortured and can survive it; she 
can endure any torment and still retain her beauty. It is as though, above 
and beyond her natural body (a part of the cycle ofgeneration and corrup- 
tion), and thus above and beyond her natural death, she possessed another 
body, a body composed of some other substance, one excepted from the 
vital cycle - a sublime body . 1 

Today, we can find this same fantasy at work in various products of 
‘mass culture’, for example in animated cartoons. Consider Tom and Jerry, 
cat and mouse. Each is subjected to frightful misadventures: the cat is 
stabbed, dynamite goes off in his pocket, he is run over by a steamroller 
and his body is flattened into a ribbon, and so forth; but in the next scene 
he appears with his normal body and the game begins again - it is as 
though he possessed another indestructible body. Or take the example of 
video games, in which we deal, literally, with the differences between the 
two deaths: the usual rule of such games is that the player (or, more 
precisely, the figure representing him in the game) possesses several lives, 

i Miran Bozovic, ‘Immer Arger mit dem Korper’, Wo es war 5 6 , Ljubljana Vienna, 
1988. 



150 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


usually three; he is threatened by some danger - a monster who can eat 
him, for example, and if the monster catches him he loses a life - but if 
he reaches his goal very swiftly he earns one or several supplementary 
lives. The whole logic of such games is therefore based on the difference 
between the two deaths: between the death in which I lose one of my lives 
and the ultimate death in which I lose the game itself. 

Lacan conceives this difference between the two deaths as the difference 
between real (biological) death and its symbolization, the ‘settling of 
accounts’, the accomplishment of symbolic destiny (deathbed confession 
in Catholicism, for example). This gap can be filled in various ways; it can 
contain either sublime beauty or fearsome monsters: in Antigone’s case, 
her symbolic death, her exclusion from the symbolic community of the 
city, precedes her actual death and imbues her character with sublime 
beauty, whereas the ghost of Hamlet’s father represents the opposite case 
- actual death unaccompanied by symbolic death, without a settling of 
accounts - which is why he returns as a frightful apparition until his debt 
has been repaid. 

This place ‘between the two deaths’, a place of sublime beauty as well 
as terrifying monsters, is the site of das Ding, of the real-traumatic kernel 
in the midst of symbolic order. This place is opened by symbolization/ 
historicization: the process of historicization implies an empty place, a 
non-historical kernel around which the symbolic network is articulated. 
In other words, human history differs from animal evolution precisely by 
its reference to this non-historical place, a place which cannot be symbolized, 
although it is retroactively produced by the symbolization itself as soon 
as ‘brute’, pre-symbolic reality is symbolized/historicized, it ‘secretes’, it 
isolates the empty, ‘indigestible’ place of the Thing. 

It is this reference to the empty place of the Thing which enables us 
to conceive the possibility of a total, global annihilation of the signifiefs 
network: the ‘second death’, the radical annihilation of nature’s circular 
movement, is conceivable only in so far as this circular movement is already 
symbolized/historicized, inscribed, caught in the symbolic web - absolute 
death, the ‘destruction of the universe’, is always the destruction of the 



YOU ONLY DIE TWICE 


151 


symbolic universe. The Freudian ‘death drive’ is nothing but the exact 
theoretical concept for this Sadeian notion of the ‘second death’ - the 
possibility of the total ‘wipe-out’ of historical tradition opened up by the 
very process of symbolization/historicization as its radical, self-destructive 
limit. 

In the whole history of Marxism, there is probably only one point at 
which this non-historical ‘ex-timate’ kernel of history was touched - at 
which the reflection of history was brought to the ‘death drive’ as its 
degree zero: Theses on the Philosophy of History, the last text by Walter 
Benjamin, ‘fellow-traveller’ of the Frankfurt School. The reason for this is 
of course that it was again Benjamin who - a unique case in Marxism - 
conceived history as a text, as series of events which ‘will have been’ - their 
meaning, their historical dimension, is decided afterwards, through their 
inscription in the symbolic network. 


Revolution as repetition 

These Theses themselves occupy an ‘ex-timate’ place; they are like a strange 
body resisting insertion not only in the frame of the Frankfurt School but 
in the very continuity of Benjamin’s thought. That is to say, one usually 
conceives Benjamin’s development as a gradual approach to Marxism; in 
this continuity, the Theses make a clear incision: there, at the very end of 
his theoretical (and physical] activity, emerges suddenly the problem of 
theology. Historical materialism can triumph only if it ‘enlists the services 
of theology’ - here is the famous first thesis: 

The story is told of an automaton constructed in such a way that it could 
play a winning game of chess, answering each move of an opponent 
with a countermove. A puppet in Turkish attire and with a hookah in 
its mouth sat before a chessboard placed on a large table. A system of 
mirrors created the illusion that this table was transparent from all 
sides. Actually, a little hunchback who was an expert chess player sat 
inside and guided the puppet’s hand by means of strings. One can 



152 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 

imagine a philosophical counterpart to this device. The puppet called 
‘historical materialism’ is to win all the time. It can easily be a match 
for anyone ifit enlists the service of theology, which today, as we know, 
is wizened and has to keep out of sight.' 

What strikes the eye in this fragment is the contradiction between the 
allegory forming the first part of the thesis and its interpretation in the 
second part. In the interpretation, it is historical materialism which ‘enlists 
the services of theology’; whereas in the allegory itself theology (‘a little 
hunchback’) guides the puppet - ‘historical materialism’ - by means of 
strings from within. This contradiction is ofcourse the very contradiction 
between allegory and its meaning, ultimately between signifier and the 
signified, which pretends to ‘enlist the services’ of the signifier as its 
instrument but finds itself quickly entangled in its network. The two 
different levels thus traverse one another: the formal structure of 
Benjamin’s allegory functions in exactly the same way as its ‘content’, 
theology in its relationship to historical materialism, which pretends 
simply to enlist its services but becomes more and more entangled in its 
strings because - if we may permit ourselves this Vorlust, this forepleasure 
- ‘theology’ designates here the agency of the signifier. 

But let us proceed step by step: how should we conceive the theological 
dimension referred to by Benjamin? ‘Theology’ announces here a unique 
experience, alluded to in the following fragment published after 
Benjamin’s death: ‘In Eingedenken, we make an experience which forbids 
us to conceive history in a fundamentally atheological way.’ We cannot 
translate this Eingedenken simply by ‘remembrance’ or ‘reminiscence’; the 
more literal translation, ‘to transpose oneself in thoughts/into something’, 
is also inadequate. 

Although it is really a kind of ‘appropriation of the past’ which is at 
stake here, we cannot conceive Eingedenken in an adequate way as long as 
we stay within the field of hermeneutics - Benjamin’s aim is quite the 


2 Walter Benjamin, Illuminations, New York: Schocken, 1969, p. 253. 



YOU ONLY DIE TWICE 


153 


opposite of the fundamental guidance of hermeneutical understanding 
('to locate the interpreted text into the totality ofits epoch’). What Benjamin 
has in mind is, on the contrary, the isolation of a piece of the past from 
the continuity of history ('. . . blasting a specific life out of the era or a 
specific work out of the lifework’ - Thesis XVII): an interpretative procedure 
whose opposition to hermeneutics recalls immediately the Freudian 
opposition between interpretation en detail and interpretation en masse. 
‘What we must take as the object of our attention is not the dream as a 
whole but the separate portions of its content’ . J 

This refusal of the hermeneutical approach has, to be sure, nothing 
whatsoever to do with a simple ‘regression’ to pre-hermeneutical naivete: 
the point is not for us to ‘accustom ourselves to the past’ by abstracting 
our actual historical position, the place from which we are speaking. 
Eingedenken certainly is an appropriation of the past which is ‘interested’, 
biased towards the oppressed class: ‘To articulate the past historically does 
not mean to recognize it “the way it really was'” (Thesis VI) . . . ‘Not man 
or men but the struggling, oppressed class itself is the depository of histor 
ical knowledge’ (Thesis XIII). 

We would none the less falsify the meaning of these lines by reading 
them in the sense of a Nietzschean historiography, of a ‘will to power as 
interpretation’, as the right of the winner to ‘write his own history’, to 
impose his ‘perspective’ - by seeing in them a kind of reference to the 
struggle between the two classes, the ruling and the oppressed, for ‘who 
will write the history’. Perhaps it is so for the ruling class, but it is certainly 
not so for the oppressed class; between the two, there is a fundamental 
asymmetry which Benjamin designates by means of two different modes 
of temporality: the empty, homogeneous time of continuity (proper to the 
reigning, official historiography) and the ‘filled’ time of discontinuity 
(which defines historical materialism). 

By confining itself to ‘the way it really was’, by conceiving history as 
a closed, homogeneous, rectilinear, continuous course of events, the traditional historiographic gaze is a priori, formally, the gaze of ‘those 
who have won’: it sees history as a closed continuity of ‘progression’ leading 
to the reign of those who rule today. It leaves out of consideration what 
failed in history, what has to be denied so that the continuity of ‘what 
really happened’ could establish itself The reigning historiography writes 
a ‘positive’ history of great achievements and cultural treasures, whereas 
a historical materialist 

views them with cautious detachment. For without exception the 
cultural treasures he surveys have an origin which he cannot contem- 
plate without horror. They owe their existence not only to the efforts 
of the great minds and talents who have created them, but also to 
the anonymous toil of their contemporaries. There is no document 
of civilization which is not at the same time a document of barbarism. 
(Thesis VII) 

In contrast to the triumphal procession of victors exhibited by official 
historiography, the oppressed class appropriates the past to itself in so far 
as it is ‘open’, in so far as the ‘yearning for redemption’ is already at work 
in it - that is to say, it appropriates the past in so far as the past already 
contains - in the form of what failed, of what was extirpated - the dimen- 
sion of the future: ‘The past carries with it a temporal index by which it 
is referred to redemption’ (Thesis II). 

To accomplish the appropriation of this stifled dimension of the past 
in so far as it already contains the future - the future of our own revolu- 
tionary act which, by means of repetition, redeems retroactively the past 
(‘There is a secret agreement between past generations and the present 
one. Our coming was expected on earth’ [Thesis II]) - we have to cut 
through the continuous flow of historical development and make a ‘tiger’s 
leap into the past’ (Thesis XIV). Only here do we arrive at the fundamental 
asymmetry between historiographic evolutionism describing history’s 
continuous movement and historical materialism: 



YOU ONLY DIE TWICE 


155 


A historical materialist cannot do without the notion of a present which 
is not a transition, but in which time stands still and has come to a 
stop. For this notion defines the present in which he himself is writing 
history. (Thesis XVI) 

Thinking involves not only the flow of thoughts, but their arrest as 
well. Where thinking suddenly stops in a configuration pregnant with 
tensions, it gives that configuration a shock, by which it crystallizes 
into a monad. A historical materialist approaches a historical subject 
only where he encounters it as a monad. In this structure he recognizes 
the sign of a Messianic cessation of happening, or, put differently, a 
revolutionary chance in the fight for the oppressed past. (Thesis XVII) 

Here we have the first surprise: what specifies historical materialism - in 
contrast to the Marxist doxa according to which we must grasp events in 
the totality of their interconnection and in their dialectical movement - 
is its capacity to arrest, to immobilize historical movement and to isolate the 
detail from its historical totality. 

It is this very crystallization, this ‘congelation’ of the movement in a 
monad, which announces the moment of the appropriation of the past: 
the monad is an actual moment to which is attached directly - bypassing 
the continuous line ofevolution- the past: the contemporary revolutionary 
situation which conceives itself as a repetition of past failed situations, as 
their retroactive ‘redemption’ through the success of its own exploit. The past 
itselfis here 'filled out with the present', the moment of the revolutionary 
chance decides not only the lot of the actual revolution but also the lot of 
all past failed revolutionary attempts: 

Historical materialism wishes to retain the image of the past which 
unexpectedly appears to man singled out by history at a moment of 
danger. The danger affects both the content of the tradition and its 
receivers. (Thesis VI) 



1 56 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


The risk of defeat of the actual revolution endangers the past itself 
because the actual revolutionary conj unction functions as a condensation 
of past missed revolutionary chances repeating themselves in the actual 
revolution: 

History is the subject of a structure whose site is not homogeneous, 
empty time, but time filled by the presence of the now \Jetztzeii\. Thus, 
to Robespierre ancient Rome was a past charged with the time of the 
now which he blasted out of the continuum of history. The French 
Revolution viewed itself as Rome reincarnate. It evoked ancient Rome 
the way fashion evokes costumes of the past. (Thesis XIV) 

For those acquainted with the Freudian proposition that ‘the unconscious 
is located outside time’, all is actually said here: this ‘filled-out time’, this 
‘tiger’s leap into the past’ with which the revolutionary present is charged, 
announces the compulsion to repeat. The arrest of historical movement, the 
suspension of the temporal continuity mentioned by Benjamin, correspond 
precisely to the ‘short-circuit’ between present and past speech which 
characterizes the transferential situation: 

Why does the analysis become transformed the moment the transfer- 
ential situation is analysed through evoking the old situation, when 
the subject found himself with an entirely different object, one that 
cannot be assimilated to the present object? Because present speech, 
like the old speech, is placed within a parenthesis of time, within a 
form of time, if I can put it that way. The modulation of time being 
identical, the speech of the analyst [in Benjamin: of the historical mate- 
rialist] happens to have the same value as the old speech . 4 

In the monad, ‘time stops’ in so far as the actual constellation is directly 
charged with the past constellation - in other words, in so far as we 

4 Jacques Lacan, The Seminar of Jacques Lacan, Book I: Freud’s Papers on Technique, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, tp88, p. 243. 



YOU ONLY DIE TWICE 


157 


have to do with a pure repetition. Repetition is ‘located outside time’, 
not in the sense of some pre-logical archaism but simply in the sense 
of the pure signifier’s synchrony: we do not have to look for the connec- 
tion between past and present constellations in the diachronous time 
arrow; this connection reinstates itself in the form of an immediate 
paradigmatic short-circuit. 

The monad is thus the moment of discontinuity, of rupture, at which 
the linear ‘flow of time’ is suspended, arrested, ‘coagulated’, because in it 
resounds directly - that is to say: bypassing the linear succession of contin- 
uous time - the past which was repressed, pushed out of the continuity 
established by prevailing history. It is literally the point of ‘suspended 
dialectics’, of pure repetition where historical movement is placed within 
parentheses. And the only field in which we can speak of such an appro- 
priation ofthe past that the present itself ‘redeems’ it retroactively - where 
the past itself is thus included in the present - is that of the signifier: the 
suspension of movement is possible only as the signifier’s synchrony, as 
the synchronization ofthe past with the present. 

We can now see what we are dealing with in the isolation of the 
monad from historical continuity: we isolate the signifier by placing within 
parentheses the totality ofisignification. This placing of signification within 
parentheses is a condition sine qua non of the short-circuit between 
present and past: their synchronization occurs at the level of the 
autonomy of the signifier - what is synchronized, superimposed, are 
two signifiers’ networks, not two meanings. Consequently, we should 
not be surprised to find that this ‘insertion [Einschluss] of some past into 
the present texture’ is supported by the metaphor of the text, of history 
as text: 

If we are prepared to consider history as a text, we can say about it 
what some modern author said about a literary text: the past has 
deposed in it images which could be compared to those retained by 
a photographic plate. 'Only the future disposes of developers strong 
enough to make appear the picture with all its details. More than 



158 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


one page ofMarivaux or of Rousseau attests to a meaning which their 
contemporary readers were unable to decipher completely.’ 5 

Here we must refer again to Lacan, who, to explain the return of the 
repressed, makes use ofWiener’s metaphor of the inverted temporal dimen- 
sion: we see the square vanishing before we see the square: 

. . . what we see in the return of the repressed is the effaced signal of 
something which only takes on its value in the future, through its 
symbolic realization, its integration into the history of the subject. 
Literally, it will only ever be a thing which, at the given moment of 
its occurrence, will have been. 6 

So, contrary to the misleading first impression, the actual revolutionary 
situation is not a. kind of ‘return of the repressed' - rather, the returns 
of the repressed, the ‘symptoms', are past failed revolutionary attempts, 
forgotten, excluded from the frame of the reigning historical tradition, 
whereas the actual revolutionary situation presents an attempt to 
‘unfold’ the symptom, to ‘redeem’ - that is, realize in the Symbolic - 
these past failed attempts which ‘will have been’ only through their 
repetition, at which point they become retroactively what they already 
were. Apropos of Benjamin’s Theses, we can thus repeat Lacan’s formula: 
the revolution accomplishes a ‘tiger’s leap into the past’ not because it 
is in search of a kind of support in the past, in tradition, but in so far 
as this past which repeats itself in the revolution ‘comes from the 
future’ - was already in itself pregnant with the open dimension of the 
future. 


5 WalterBenjamin, Gesammelte Schriften, Volume I, Frankfurt: SuhrkampVerlag, 1955, 
p. 1238. 

6 Lacan, The Seminar of Jacques Lacan, Bookl, p. 159. 



YOU ONLY DIE TWICE 


159 


The perspective of the Last Judgement' 

At this precise point we encounter a certain surprising congruence between 
Benjamin and the Stalinist notion of history: as soon as we conceive history 
as a text, as ‘its own history’, its own narration - as something which 
receives its signification retroactively and where this delay, this effect of 
apres coup, is inscribed in the actual event itself which, literally, ‘is’ not 
but always ‘will have been’ - we are obliged, implicitly at least, to view 
the historical process from the perspective of a ‘Last Judgement': of a 
final settling of accounts, of a point of accomplished symbolization/ 
historicization, of the ‘end of history’, when every event will receive 
retroactively its definitive meaning, its final place in the total narration. 
Actual history occurs, so to speak, on credit; only subsequent development 
will decide retroactively if the current revolutionary violence will be 
forgiven, legitimated, or if it will continue to exert a pressure on the 
shoulders of the present generation as its guilt, as its unsettled debt. 

Let us recall Merleau-Ponty who, in his Humanism and Tenor, defended 
the Stalinist political trials on the grounds that although their victims 
were undoubtedly innocent, they would be justified by the subsequent 
social progress rendered possible through them. Here we have the funda- 
mental idea of this ‘perspective of the Last Judgement’ (the expression is 
Lacan’s, from his Seminar on The Ethic of Psychoanalysis): no act, no event 
falls empty; there is no pure expense, no pure loss in history; everything 
we do is written down, registered somewhere, as a trace which for the 
time being remains meaningless but which, in the moment of final 
settling, will receive its proper place. 

This is the idealism hidden in the Stalinist logic which, although it 
denies a personified God, none the less implies a Platonic heaven in the 
form of the big Other, redoubling empirical, factual history and main- 
taining its accountancy - that is, determining the ‘objective signification’ 
of each event and action. Without this accountancy, without this regis- 
tration of events and actions in the account of the Other, it would not be 
possible to conceive the functioning ofsome of the key notions ofStalinist 



160 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


discourse, such as 'the objective guilt’ - precisely, guilt in the eyes of the 
big Other of history. 

At first sight, then, Benjamin is in perfect accord with Stalinism 
concerning this ‘perspective of the Last Judgement’; but here we should 
follow the same advice as with ‘love at first sight’: take a second look. If 
we do, it soon becomes clear how this apparent proximity only confirms 
that Benjamin has touched the real nerve of the Stalinist symbolic edifice 
- he was the only one to question radically the very idea of ‘progress’ 
implied by the accountancy of the big Other of history and - precursor, 
in this respect, of the famous Lacanian formula that development ‘is 
nothing but a hypothesis of domination ' 7 - to demonstrate the uninter- 
rupted connection between progress and domination: ‘The concept of the 
historical progress of mankind cannot be sundered from the concept of 
its progression through a homogeneous, empty time’ Thesis XIII) - that 
is, from the temporality of the ruling class. 

The Stalinist perspective is that of a victor whose final triumph is 
guaranteed in advance by the ‘objective necessity of history'; which is why, 
in spite of the accent on ruptures, leaps, revolutions, his view on past 
history is evolutionary throughout. History is conceived as the continuous 
p rocess of replacing old masters with new: each victor played a ‘progressive 
role’ in his time, then lost his purpose because of unavoidable development: 
yesterday, it was the capitalist who acted in accordance with the necessity 
of progress; today, it’s our turn ... In Stalinist accountancy, ‘objective 
guilt’ (or contribution) is measured by reference to the laws qf historical 
development - of continuous evolution towards the Supreme Good 
(Communism). With Benjamin, in contrast, the ‘perspective of the Last 
Judgement' is the perspective of those who have paid the price for a series 
of great historical triumphs; the perspective of those who had to fail, to 
miss their aim, so that the series of great historical deeds could be accom- 
plished; the perspective of hopes deceived, of all that have left in the text 
of history nothing but scattered, anonymous, meaningless traces on the 


7 Jacques Lacan, Le Seminaire XX Encore, Paris: Seuil, 1975, p. 52. 



YOU ONLY DIE TWICE 


16 


margin of deeds whose ‘historical greatness’ was attested to by the 
‘objective’ gaze of official historiography. 

This is why, for Benjamin, revolution is not part of continuous historical 
evolution but, on the contrary, a moment of ‘stasis’ when the continuity is 
broken, when the texture of previous history, that of the winners, is anni- 
hilated, and when, retroactively, through the success of the revolution, each 
abortive act, each slip, each past failed attempt which functioned in the 
reigning Text as an empty and meaningless trace, will be ‘redeemed’, will 
receive its signification. In this sense, revolution is strictly a creationist act, a 
radical intrusion of the ‘death drive’: erasure of the reigning Text, creation 
exnihilo of a new Text by means of which the stifled past 'will have been’. 

To refer to the Lacanian reading of Antigone, if the Stalinist perspective 
is that of Creon, the perspective of the Supreme Good assuming the shape 
of the Common Good of the State, the perspective of Benjamin is that of 
Antigone - for Benjamin, revolution is an affair of life and death; more 
precisely: of the second, symbolic death. The alternative opened by the 
revolution is that between redemption, which will retroactively confer mean- 
ing on the ‘scum of history’ (to use this Stalinist expression) - on what was 
excluded from the continuity of Progress - and the apocalypse (its defeat), 
where even the dead will again be lost and will suffer a second death: ‘even 
the dead will not be safe from the enemy if he wins’ (Thesis VI). 

We can thus conceive the opposition between Stalinism and Benjamin 
as that between evolutionary idealism and creationist materialism. In his 
Seminar on The Ethic of Psychoanalysis, Lacan pointed out how the ideology 
of evolutionism always implies a belief in a Supreme Good, in a final Goal 
of evolution which guides its course from the very beginning. In other 
words, it always implies a hidden, disavowed teleology, whereas materi- 
alism is always creationist - it always includes a retroactive movement: the 
final Goal is not inscribed in the beginning; things receive their meaning 
afterwards; the sudden creation of an Order confers backward signification 
on to the preceding Chaos. 

At first sight, Benjamin’s position is radically anti-Hegelian: is not 
dialectics the most refined and perfidious version of evolutionism, in 



162 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 

which the very ruptures are included in the continuity of Progress, in its 
unavoidable logic? This was probably how Benjamin himself conceived 
his own position: he designated the point of rupture which cuts into 
historical continuity as the point of'suspended dialectics’, as the intrusion 
of a pure repetition putting in parentheses the progressive movement of 
Aufhebun^. But it is at this exact juncture that we must stress Hegel’s 
radical anti-evolutionism: the absolute negativity which ‘sets in motion’ 
dialectical movement is nothing but the intervention of the ‘death drive’ 
as radically non-historical, as the ‘zero degree’ of history - historical move- 
ment includes in its very heart the non-historical dimension of ‘absolute 
negativity’. In other words, the suspension of movement is a key moment 
of the dialectical process: so-called ‘dialectical development’ consists in 
the incessant repetition of a beginning ex nihilo, in the annihilation and 
retroactive restructuring of the presupposed contents. The vulgar idea of 
‘dialectical development’ as a continuous course of transformations by 
which the old dies and the new is born, in which all beckons in incessant 
movement - this idea of nature as a dynamic process of transformation, 
of generation and corruption, found everywhere from de Sade to Stalin - 
has nothing whatsoever to do with the Hegelian ‘dialectical process’. 

This quasi-'dialectical’ vision of nature as an eternal circuit of trans- 
formations does not, however, exhaust the whole ofStalinism: what escapes 
it is precisely the subjective position of the Communist himself And, to 
put it briefly, the place of the Stalinist Communist is exactly between the 
two deaths. The somewhat poetic definitions of the figure of a Communist 
that we find in Stalin’s work are to be taken literally. When, for example, 
in his speech at Lenin’s funeral, Stalin proclaims, ‘We, the Communists, 
are people of a special mould. We are made of special stuff, ’ it is quite easy 
to recognize the Lacanian name for this special stuff : objet petit a, the 
sublime object placed in the interspace between the two deaths. 

In the Stalinist vision, the Communists are ‘men ofiron will’, somehow 
excluded from the everyday cycle of ordinary human passions and weak- 
ness. It is as if they are in a way ‘the living dead’, still alive but already 
excluded from the ordinary cycle of natural forces - as if, that is, they 



YOU ONLY DIE TWICE 


163 


possess another body, the sublime body beyond their ordinary physical 
body. (Is the fact that in Lubitsch’s Ninotchka, the role of the high Party 
apparatchik is played by Bela Lugosi, identified with the figure of Dracula, 
another ‘living dead’, expressing a presentiment of the described state of 
things, or is it just a happy coincidence?) The fantasy which serves as a 
support for the figure of the Stalinist Communist is therefore exactly the 
same as the fantasy which is at work in the Tom and Jerry cartoons: behind 
the figure of the indestructibility and invincibility of the Communist who 
can endure even the most terrible ordeal and survive it intact, reinforced 
with new strength, there is the same fantasy-logic as that of a cat whose 
head is blown up by dynamite and who, in the next scene, proceeds intact 
his pursuit of his class enemy, the mouse. 


From the Master to the Leader 

The problem is that we already find this notion of a sublime body located 
between the two deaths with the classical, pre-bourgeois Master: for 
example, the King - it is as if he possesses, beyond his ordinary body, a 
sublime, ethereal mystical body personifying the State . 8 Where, then, lies 
the difference between the classical Master and the totalitarian Leader? 
The transubstantiated body ofthe classical Master is an effect of the perfor- 
mative mechanism already described by La Boetie, Pascal and Marx: we, 
the subjects, think that we treat the king as a king because he is in himself 
a king, but in reality a king is a king because we treat him like one. And 
this fact that the charismatic power of a king is an effect of the symbolic 
ritual performed by his subjects must remain hidden: as subjects, we are 
necessarily victims of the illusion that the king is already in himself a 
king. That is why the classical Master must legitimize his rule with a 
reference to some non-social, external authority (God, nature, some myth- 
ical past event . . .) - as soon as the performative mechanism which gives 
him his charismatic authority is demasked, the Master loses his power. 

8 Ernst Kantorowicz, TheKing'sTwo Bodies, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1959; Rado Riha, 'Das Dinghafte der Geldware’, Woes wan, Ljubljana Vienna, 1986. 



164 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


But the problem with the totalitarian Leader is that he no longer needs 
this external point of reference to legitimize his rule. He is not saying to his 
subjects: ‘You must follow me because I’m your Leader’, but quite the 
opposite: ‘In myself, I’m nothing, I am what I am only as an expression, an 
embodiment, an executor of your will, my strength is your strength . . .’ To 
put it briefly, it is as if the totalitarian Leader is addressing his subjects 
and legitimizing his power precisely by referring to the above-mentioned 
Pascalian-Marxian argument - that is, revealing to them, the secret of the 
classical Master; basically, he is saying to them: ‘I’m your Master because 
you treat me as your Master; it is you, with your activity, who make me 
your Master!’ 

How, then, can we subvert the position of the totalitarian Leader, if 
the classical Pascalian-Marxian argument no longer works? Here the basic 
deception consists in the fact that the Leader’s point of reference, the 
instance to which he is referring to legitimize his rule (the People, the 
Class, the Nation), does not exist - or, more precisely, exists only through 
and in its fetishistic representative, the Party and its Leader. The misrecog- 
nition of the performative dimension runs here in the opposite direction: 
the classical Master is Master only in so far as his subjects treat him as 
Master, but here, the People are the 'real People’ only in so far as they are 
embodied in their representative, the Party and its Leader. 

The formula of the totalitarian misrecognition of the performative 
dimension would then be as follows: the Party thinks that it is the Party 
because it represents the People’s real interests, because it is rooted in the 
People, expressing their will; but in reality the People are the People because 
- or, more precisely, in so far as - they are embodied in the Party. And by 
saying that the People do not exist as a support of the Party, we do not 
mean the obvious fact that the majority of the people do not really support 
Party rule; the mechanism is a little more complicated. The paradoxical 
functioning of the ‘People’ in the totalitarian universe can be most easily 
detected through analysis of phrases like 'the whole People supports the 
Party’. This proposition cannot be falsified because behind the form of an 
observation of a fact, we have a circular definition of the People: in the 



YOU ONLY DIE TWICE 165 

Stalinist universe, ‘supporting the rule of the Party’ is ‘rigidly designated’ 
by the term ‘People’ - it is, in the last analysis, the only feature which in all 
possible worlds defines the People. That is why the real member of the People 
is only he who supports the rule of the Party: those who work against its 
rule are automatically excluded from the People; they became the ‘enemies 
of the People’. What we have here is a somewhat crueller version of a well- 
known joke: ‘My fiancee never misses an appointment with me because 
the moment she misses one, she is no longer my fiancee’ - the People 
always support the Party because any member of the People who opposes 
Party rule automatically excludes himself from the People. 

The Lacanian definition of democracy would then be: a sociopolitical 
order in which the People do not exist - do not exist as a unity, embodied 
in their unique representative. That is why the basic feature of the demo- 
cratic order is that the place of Power is, by the necessity of its structure, 
an empty place . 9 In a democratic order, sovereignty lies in the People - 
but what is the People if not, precisely, the collection of the subjects of 
power? Here we have the same paradox as that ofa natural language which 
is at the same time the ultimate, the highest metalanguage. Because the 
People cannot immediately govern themselves, the place of Power must 
always remain an empty place; any person occupying it can do so only 
temporarily, as a kind of surrogate, a substitute for the real-impossible 
sovereign - ‘nobody can rule innocently’, as Saint-Just puts it. And in total- 
itarianism, the Party becomes again the very subject who, being the imme- 
diate embodiment of the People, can rule innocently. It is not by accident 
that the real-socialist countries call themselves ‘people’s democracies’ - 
here, finally, 'the People’ exist again. 

It is against the background of this emptying of the place of Power 
that we can measure the break introduced by the 'democratic invention’ 
(Lefort) in the history of institutions: ‘democratic society’ could be 
determined as a society whose institutional structure includes, as a part 
of its ‘normal’, ‘regular’ reproduction, the moment of dissolution of 


9 Claude Lefort, L'lwention democratique, Paris: Fayard, 1981, 



166 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 

the socio-symbolic bond, the moment of irruption of the Real: elections. 
Lefort interprets elections (those of ‘formal’, 'bourgeois’ democracy) as an 
act of symbolic dissolution of the social edifice: their crucial feature is the 
one that is usually made the target for Marxist criticism of ‘formal democ- 
racy’ - the fact that we take part as abstract citizens, atomized individuals, 
reduced to pure Ones without further qualifications. 

At the moment of elections, the whole hierarchic network of social 
relations is in a way suspended, put in parentheses; ‘society’ as an organic 
unity ceases to exist, it changes into a contingent collection of atomized 
individuals, of abstract units, and the result depends on a purely quanti- 
tative mechanism of counting, ultimately on a stochastic process: some 
wholly unforeseeable (or manipulated) event - a scandal which erupts a 
few days before an election, for example - can add that ‘half per cent’ one 
way or the other that determines the general orientation of the country’s 
politics over the next few years ... In vain do we conceal this thoroughly 
‘irrational’ character of what we call 'formal democracy’: at the moment 
of an election, the society is delivered to a stochastic process. Only the 
acceptance of such a risk, only such a readiness to hand over one’s fate to 
‘irrational’ hazard, renders ‘democracy’ possible: it is in this sense that we 
should read the dictum of Winston Churchill which I have already 
mentioned: 'democracy is the worst of all possible political systems, the 
only problem is that none of the others is better’. 

It is true that democracy makes possible all sorts of manipulation, 
corruption, the rule of demagogy, and so on, but as soon as we eliminate 
the possibility of such deformations, we lose democracy itself - a neat 
example of the Hegelian Universal which can realize itself only in impure, 
deformed, corrupted forms; if we want to remove these deformations and 
to grasp the Universal in its intact purity, we obtain its very opposite. So- 
called 'real democracy’ is just another name for non-democracy: if we want 
to exclude the possibility of manipulation, we must ‘verify’ the candidates 
in advance, we must introduce the difference between the ‘true interests 
of the People’ and its contingent fluctuating opinion, subj ected to all kinds 
of demagogy and confusion, and so on - thus finishing with what is 



YOU ONLY DIE TWICE 


167 


usually called ‘organized democracy’, in which the effective elections take 
place before elections and where the ballot has only plebiscitary value. In 
short, ‘organized democracy' is a way of excluding the irruption of the 
Real which characterizes ‘formal’ democracy: the moment of dissolution 
of the social edifice into a purely numerical collection of atomized 
individuals. 

So although ‘in reality’ there are only ‘exceptions’ and ‘deformations’, the 
universal notion of ‘democracy’ is none the less a ‘necessary fiction’, a 
symbolic fact in the absence of which effective democracy, in all the plurality 
of its forms, could not reproduce itself Here Hegel is paradoxically close to 
Jeremy Bentham, to his Theory of Fictions, one of Lacan’s constant references: 
the Hegelian Universal is such a ‘fiction’ as ‘exists nowhere in reality’ (there, 
we have nothing but exceptions] but is none the less implied by ‘reality’ 
itself as a point of reference conferring on it its symbolic consistency. 




THE SUBJECT 




5 Which Subject of the Real? 


‘ There is no metalanguage’ 

In comprehending Lacan as ‘post-structuralist’, one usually overlooks the 
radical break that separates him from the field of ‘post-structuralism’: 
even the propositions common to the two fields obtain a totally different 
dimension in each. ‘There is no metalanguage’, for example: this is a 
commonplace found not only in Lacan’s psychoanalysis and in post- 
structuralism (Derrida) but also in contemporary hermeneutics (Gadamer) 
- we usually lose from view how Lacan’s theory treats this proposition in 
a way that is completely incompatible with post-structuralism, as well as 
hermeneutics. 

Post-structuralism claims that a text is always ‘framed’ by its own 
commentary: the interpretation of a literary text resides on the same 
plane as its ‘object’. Thus the interpretation is included in the literary 
corpus: there is no ‘pure’ literary object that would not contain an 
element of interpretation, of distance towards its immediate meaning. 
In post-structuralism the classic opposition between the object-text and 
its external interpretative reading is thus replaced by a continuity of an 
infinite literary text which is always already its own reading; that is, 
which sets up distance from itself. That is why the post-structuralist 
procedure par excellence is not only to search in purely literary texts for 
propositions containing a theory about their own functioning but also 
to read theoretical texts themselves as ‘literature’ - more precisely, to 



172 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


put in parentheses their claim to truth in order to expose the textual 
mechanisms producing the ‘truth effect’. As Habermas has already 
pointed out, in post-structuralism we have a kind of universalized 
aestheticization whereby ‘truth’ itself is finally reduced to one of the 
style effects of the discursive articulation . 1 

In contrast to this Nietzschean reference of post-structuralism, 
Lacan’s work makes almost no references to Nietzsche. Lacan always 
insists on psychoanalysis as a truth-experience: his thesis that truth is 
structured like a fiction has nothing at all to do with a post-structuralist 
reduction of the truth-dimension to a textual ‘truth-effect’. Actually, it 
was Levi-Strauss who, in spite of his ferocious critique of ‘post- 
structuralist fashion', opened the way to a ‘deconstructivist’ poeticism 
by reading theoretical interpretations of myths as new versions of the 
same myth; for example, he conceived Freud’s theory of the Oedipus 
complex as just a new variation on the Oedipus myth. 

In ‘post-structuralism’, metonymy obtains a clear logical predominance 
over metaphor. The metaphorical ‘cut’ is conceived as an effort doomed 
to fail; doomed to stabilize, canalize, or dominate the metonymical 
dissipation of the textual stream. In this perspective, the Lacanian insis- 
tence on the primacy of metaphor over metonymy, his thesis that 
metonymical sliding must always be supported by a metaphorical cut, 
can appear to post-structuralists only as an indication that his theory is 
still marked by the ‘metaphysics of presence’. Post-structuralists see the 
Lacanian theory of the point decapiton, of the phallic signifier as the signifier 
of lack, as an effort to master and restrain the ‘dissemination’ of the textual 
process. Is it not, they say, an attempt to localize a lack in a single signifier, 
the One, although it is the signifier of lack itself? Derrida repeatedly 
reproaches Lacan for the paradoxical gesture of reducing lack through its 
affirmation of itself. Lack is localized in a point of exception which 
guarantees the consistency of all the other elements, by the mere fact that 


i Jiirgen Habermas, T he Philosophical Discourse of Modernity, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1988. 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL! 173 


it is determined as ‘symbolic castration’, by the mere fact that the phallus 
is defined as its signifierd 

Even at the level of a naive ‘immediate’ reading, it is difficult to avoid 
the feeling that in this post-structuralist position something is amiss - 
or, more precisely, that this criticism of Lacan runs a little too smoothly. The 
post-structuralist position constantly repeats that no text could be totally 
non-metaphysical. On the one hand, it is not possible to get rid of the 
metaphysical tradition by a simple gesture of taking distance, of placing 
oneself outside it, because the language we are obliged to use is penetrated 
by metaphysics. On the other hand, however, every text, however meta- 
physical, always produces gaps which announce breaches in the 
metaphysical circle: the points at which the textual process subverts what 
its ‘author’ intended to say. Is such a position not just a little too conven- 
ient? To put it more bluntly, the position from which the deconstructivist 
can always make sure of the fact that ‘there is no metalanguage’, that no 
utterance can say precisely what it intended to say, that the process of 
enunciation always subverts the utterance, is the position of metalanguage 
in its purest, most radical form. 

How can one not recognize, in the passionate zeal with which the post- 
structuralist insists that every text, his own included, is caught in a 
fundamental ambiguity and flooded with the ‘dissemination’ of the inter- 
textual process, the signs of an obstinate denial (in the Freudian sense of 
Vemeinung ); a barely hidden acknowledgement of the fact that one is speak- 
ing from a safe position, a position not menaced by the decentred textual 
process? That is why post-structuralist poeticism is ultimately affected. 
The whole effort to write ‘poetically’, to make us feel how our own text 
is already caught in a decentred network of plural processes and how this 
textual process always subverts what we ‘intended to say’, the whole effort 
to evade the purely theoretical form of exposing our ideas and to adopt 
rhetorical devices usually reserved to literature, masks the annoying fact 
that at the root of what post-structuralists are saying there is a clearly 

2 Jacques Derrida, The Post Card: From Socrates to Freud and Beyond, Chicago: Chicago 
University Press, 1987. 



174 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


defined theoretical position which can be articulated without difficulty 
in a pure and simple metalanguage. 

The grand post-structuralist assumption is that the classic reduction 
of rhetorical devices to external means which do not concern the signified 
contents is illusory: the so-called stylistic devices already determine the 
‘inner’ notional contents themselves. Yet it would appear that the post- 
structuralist poetic style itself - the style of continuous ironic self- 
commentary and self-distance, the way of constantly subverting what one 
was supposed to say literally - exists only to embellish some basic theo- 
retical propositions. That is why post-structuralist commentaries often 
produce an effect of ‘bad infinity’ in the Hegelian sense: an endless 
quasi-poetical variation on the same theoretical assumption, a variation 
which does not produce anything new. The problem with deconstruction, 
then, is not that it renounces a strict theoretical formulation and yields 
to a flabby poeticism. On the contrary, it is that its position is too ‘theo- 
retical’ (in the sense of a theory which excludes the truth-dimension; that 
is, which does not affect the place from which we speak). 


The phallic signifier 

How, then, can we elude this deadlock? It is here that Lacan differs 
radically from post-structuralists. In Seminar XI he begins one of his 
sentences: ‘But this is precisely what I want to say and what I am saying 
- because what I want to say is what I am saying . . . ’ In a post- 
structuralist reading, such phrases prove that Lacan still wants to retain 
the position of Master: ‘saying what I wanted to say’ lays claim to a coin- 
cidence between what we intend to say and what we are effectively 
saying - is not this coincidence what defines the illusion of the Master? 
Is Lacan not proceeding as ifhis own text is exempt from the gap between 
what is said and what he intends to say? Is he not claiming that he can 
dominate the signifying effects of this text? In the Lacanian perspective 
it is, on the contrary, precisely such ‘impossible’ utterances - utterances 
following the logic of the paradox ‘I am lying’ - which keep the 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL? 


175 


fundamental gap of the signifying process open and in this way prevent 
us from assuming a metalanguage position. 

Lacan is close to Brecht here. One has only to remember the basic proce- 
dure of Brecht’s ‘learning plays’ of the early 1930s in which the dramatis 
personae pronounce an ‘impossible’ commentary on their own acts. An 
actor enters the stage and says: ‘I am a capitalist whose aim is to exploit 
workers. Now I will try to convince one ofmy workers of the truth of the 
bourgeois ideology which legitimizes the exploitation . . . ’ He then 
approaches the worker and does exactly what he has announced he would 
do. Does such a procedure - an actor commenting on his deeds from an 
‘objective’ position of pure metalanguage - not make it clear, in an almost 
palpable way, the utter impossibility of occupying this position; is it not, 
in its very absurdity, infinitely more subversive than the poeticism which 
prohibits every direct, simple utterance and feels obliged always to add 
new comments, retreats, digressions, brackets, quotation marks ... - so 
many assurances that what we are saying is not to be taken directly or 
literally, as identical to itself? 

Metalanguage is not just an Imaginary entity. It is Real in the strict 
Lacanian sense - that is, it is impossible to occupy its position. But, Lacan 
adds, it is even more difficult simply to avoid it. One cannot attain it, but 
one also cannot escape it. That is why the only way to avoid the Real is to 
produce an utterance of pure metalanguage which, by its patent absurdity, 
materializes its own impossibility: that is, a paradoxical element which, 
in its very identity, embodies absolute otherness, the irreparable gap that 
makes it impossible to occupy a metalanguage position. 

For Derrida the localization of the lack is supposed to tame the ‘dissem- 
ination’ of the process of writing, while for Lacan only the presence of 
such a paradoxical ‘at least one’ sustains the radical dimension of the gap. 
The Lacanian name of this paradoxical element is, of course, the phallus 
as signifter, a kind of negative version of ‘truth as the index of itself. The 
phallic signifter is, so to speak, an index of its own impossibility. In its 
very positivity it is the signifter of ‘castration’ - that is, of its own lack. 
The so-called pre-phallic objects (breasts, excrement) are lost objects, while 



176 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


the phallus is not simply lost but is an object which gives body to a certain 
fundamental loss in its very presence. In the phallus, loss as such attains a positive 
existence. Here Lacan differs from Jung, to whom has been attributed - 
wrongly, perhaps, but se non e vero, e ben trovato - the famous phrase: ‘What 
is a penis but a phallic symbol?’ 

Let us also recall Otto Fenichel’s interpretation of the obscene gesture 
called in German ‘the long nose’ [die lange Nose], Spreading the fingers in 
front of the face and putting the thumb on the nose supposedly connotes 
the erected phallus. The message of this gesture would appear to be a 
simple showing-off in front of an adversary: look how big mine is; mine 
is bigger than yours. Instead of refuting this simplistic interpretation 
directly, Fenichel introduces a small displacement: the logic of insulting 
an adversary always involves imitating one of his/her features. If this is 
true, what, then, is so insulting in an imitation which points out that the 
other has a large and powerful virile member? Fenichel’s solution is that 
one has to read this gesture as the first part of a sentence, the second part 
of which is omitted. The whole of it reads: 'Yours is so big and powerful, 
but i n spite of that, you are impotent. Y ou cannot hurt me with it! 1 

In this way the adversary is caught in a forced choice which, according to 
Lacan, defines the experience of castration: if he cannot, he cannot; but even 
if he can, any attesting to his power is doomed to function as a denial - that 
is, as a masking of his fundamental impotence, as a mere showing-off which 
just confirms, in a negative way, that he cannot do anything . 3 4 The more he 
reacts, the more he shows his power, the more his impotence is confirmed. 

It is in this precise sense that the phallus is the signifier of castration. 
This is the logic of the phallic inversion which sets in when the demonstration 
of power starts to function as a confirmation of a fundamental impotence. 
This is also the logic of so-called political provocation addressed against a 
totalitarian power structure. The punk imitating the ‘sadomasochistic’ power 
ritual is not to be conceived as a case of the victim’s identification with 

3 Otto Fenichel, ‘Die “lange Nase” Imago 14, Vienna, 1928. 

4 Jacques Lacan, The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psycho Analysis, Harmondsworth: 
Penguinb, 1979, Chapter 16. 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL? 


177 


the aggressor (as it is usually interpreted). The message to the power 
structure is, on the contrary, the negation implied in the positive act of 
imitation: you are so powerful, but for all that, you are impotent. You cannot 
redly hurt me! In this way, the power structure is caught in the same trap. 
The more violent its reaction, the more it confirms its fundamental 
impotence. 


‘Lenin in Warsaw' as object 

Toarticulate more precisely the way in which the Lacanian phallic signifier 
entails the impossibility of metalanguage, let us return to the post- 
structuralist understanding of the idea that ‘there is no metalanguage’. 
Its starting point is the fact that the zero level of all metalanguages - natu- 
ral, ordinary language - is simultaneously the last interpretative frame- 
work of all of them: it is the ultimate metalanguage. Ordinary language 
is its own metalanguage. It is self-referential; the place of an incessant 
auto-reflexive movement. In this conceptualization one does not mention 
the object too much. Usually, one gets rid of it simply by pointing out 
how ‘reality’ is already structured through the medium of language. In 
this way post-structuralists can calmly abandon themselves to the infinite 
self-interpretative play of language. ‘There is no metalanguange’ is actually 
taken to mean its exact opposite: that there is no pure object-language, any 
language that would function as a purely transparent medium for the 
designation of pre-given reality. Every ‘objective’ statement about things 
includes some kind of self-distance, a rebounding of the signifier from its 
‘literal meaning’. In short, language is always saying, more or less, something 
other than what it means to say. 

In Lacan’s teaching, however, the proposition ‘there is no metalanguage’ 
is to be taken literally. It means that all language is in a way an object- 
language: there is no language without object. Even when the language is 
apparently caught in a web of self-referential movement, even when it is 
apparently speaking only about itself, there is an objective, non-signifying 
‘reference’ to this movement. The Lacanian mark of it is, of course, the 



178 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


objet petit a. The self-referential movement of the signifier is not that of a 
closed circle, but an elliptical movement around a certain void. And the 
objet petit a, as the original lost object which in a way coincides with its 
own loss, is precisely the embodiment of this void. 

This ‘internal exclusion' of the object from the Other of the symbolic 
network also allows us to expose the confusion upon which the Derridean 
assumption of the ‘title-address of the letter’ [le titredela lettre ] rests: that 
is, the criticism of Lacanian theory in which, according to Derrida, the 
letter always possesses its title-address, always reaches its destination. This 
is supposed to attest to the ‘closed economy’ of the Lacanian concept of 
the Symbolic: the central point of reference (the signifier of lack) allegedly 
precludes the possibility that a letter could go astray, lose its circular- 
teleological path and miss its address . 5 

Where does the misunderstanding in this criticism lie? It is true that 
in Lacanian theory ‘every letter has its title’, but this title is definitely not 
some kind of fe/ojofits trajectory. The Lacanian ‘title of the letter’ is closer 
to the title of a picture; for example, that described in a well-known joke 
about ‘Lenin in Warsaw’. At an art exhibition in Moscow, there is a picture 
showing Nadezhda Krupskaya, Lenin’s wife, in bed with a young member 
of the Komsomol. The title of the picture is ‘Lenin in Warsaw’. A bewildered 
visitor asks a guide: ‘But where is Lenin?’ The guide replies quietly and 
with dignity: ‘Lenin is in Warsaw’. 

If we put aside Lenin’s position as the absent Third, the bearer of the 
prohibition of the sexual relationship, we could say that ‘Lenin in Warsaw’ 
is, in a strict Lacanian sense, the object of this picture. The title names the 
object which is lacking in the field of what is depicted. That is to say, in 
this joke, the trap in which the visitor was caught could be defined precisely 
as the metalanguage trap. The visitor’s mistake is to establish the same 
distance between the picture and the title as between the sign and the 
denoted object, as if the title is speaking about the picture from a kind of 
‘objective distance’, and then to look for its positive correspondence in the 


5 Jean Luc Nancy and Philippe Lacoue Labarthe, Le Titre de la lettre, Paris: Galilee, 1973. 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL! 179 


picture. Thus the visitor poses a question: ‘Where is the object indicated 
by its title depicted?’ But the whole point is, of course, that in this case 
the relation between the picture and its title is not the usual one whereby 
the title corresponds simply to what is depicted (‘Landscape’, ‘Self-portrait j. 
Here the title is, so to speak, on the same surface. It is part of the same 
continuity as the picture itself Its distance from the picture is strictly 
internal, making an incision into the picture. That is why something must 
fall (out) from the picture: not its title, but the object which is replaced 
by the title. 

In other words, the title of this picture functions as the Freudian 
Vorstellungsreprdsentanz: the representative, the substitute of some 
representation, the signifying element filling out the vacant place of 
the missing representation (of the depiction, that is, of Lenin himself). 
The field of representation [Vorstellung\ is the field of what is positively 
depicted, but the problem is that everything cannot be depicted. Some- 
thing must necessarily fall out, ‘Lenin must be in Warsaw’, and the title 
takes the place of this void, of this missing, ‘originally repressed’ repre- 
sentation: its exclusion functions as a positive condition for the emer- 
gence of what is being depicted (because, to put it bluntly, if Lenin were 
not in Warsaw, Nadezhda Krupskaya could not . . . ). If we take the word 
‘subject’ in the sense of ‘content’, we can say that what we have here is 
precisely the difference subject/object. ‘Nadezhda Krupskaya in bed with a 
young Komsomol member’ is the subject of the picture; ‘Lenin in Warsaw’ 
is its object. 

We can take this as a joke about Vorstellungsreprasentanz, and now we 
can also understand why the signifier as such has the status of the Vorstel- 
lungsreprdsentanz in Lacan. It is no longer the simple Saussurean material 
representative of the signified, of the mental representation-idea, but the 
substitute filling out the void of some originally missing representation: 
it does not bring to mind any representation, it represents its lack. The 
misunderstanding in the post-structuralist criticism of Lacan is ultimately 
a misunderstanding about the nature of Vorstellungsreprasentanz. This 
criticism misses the fact that the Vorstellungsreprasentanzjhe pure, reflexive signifier incarnating the lack itself) fills out the void of the lost object. As 
soon as the Vorstellungsreprasentanz is no longer connected to this hole in 
the Other, to the falling out of the object, it begins to function as a ‘title’: 
as a metalanguage designation, as an incision that limits, totalizes, canal- 
izes the original dispersion of the signifying texture ... in short, we find 
ourselves in a ‘post-structuralist’ mess. 

If the joke about Lenin in Warsaw exemplifies the logic of the master- 
signifier, there is another joke - in a way its symmetrical inversion - which 
exemplifies the logic of the object: the joke about the conscript who tries 
to evade military service by pretending to be mad. His symptom is that 
he compulsively checks all the pieces of paper he can lay his hands on, 
constantly repeating: ‘That is not it!’ He is sent to the military psychiatrist, 
in whose office he also examines all the papers lying around, including 
those in the wastepaper basket, repeating all the time: ‘That is not it!’ The 
psychiatrist, finally convinced that he really is mad, gives him a written 
warrant releasing him from military service. The conscript casts a look at 
it and says cheerfully: ‘That is it!’ 

We can say that this little piece of paper finally found - a warrant of 
release - has the status of an object in the Lacanian sense. Why? Because 
it is an object produced by the signifying texture itself It is a kind of object 
that came to exist as a result of all the fuss about it. The ‘mad’ conscript 
pretends to look for something, and through his very search, through its 
repeated failure (‘That is not it!’), he produces what he is looking for. The 
paradox, then, is that the process of searching itself produces the object 
which causes it: an exact parallel to Lacanian desire which produces its own 
object-cause. The error of all the people around the conscript, the psychi- 
atrist included, is that they overlook the way they are already part of the 
‘mad’ conscript’s game. They think they are examining him from an 
objective, metalanguage distance, like the bewildered spectator of the 
picture ‘Lenin in Warsaw’ who mistook the picture’s title for a metalan- 
guage description of its content. 

Their error is therefore symmetrical. In the case of ‘Lenin in Warsaw’ 
the title is on the same level as the depicted content of the picture and is 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL? 181 


not a metalanguage designation of it. In the second example, the paper 
as an object is part of the actual signifying process; its product and not 
its external reference. First we have the paradox of a signifier which is a 
part of the representation of reality (filling out a void, a hole in it). Then we 
have the inverse paradox of an object which must be included in the 
signifying texture. Perhaps this double paradox offers us the final clue to 
the Lacanian propositon: ‘There is no metalanguage’. 


Antagonism as Real 

To grasp this logic of an object included in the signifying texture, we must 
bear in mind the paradoxical character of the Lacanian Real. It is usually 
conceived as a hard kernel resisting symbolization, dialecticization, persist- 
ing in its place, always returning to it. There is a well-known science- 
fiction story (‘Experiment’ by Fredric Brown) that illustrates this point 
perfectly: Professor Johnson has developed a small-scale experimental 
model of a time machine. Small articles placed on it can be sent into the 
past or the future. He first demonstrates to his two colleagues a five- 
minute time travel into the future, by setting the future dial and placing 
a small brass cube on the machine’s platform. It instantly vanishes and 
reappears five minutes later. The next experiment, five minutes into the 
past, is a little trickier. Johnson explains that having set the past dial at 
fiveminutes, he will place the cube on the platform at exactly three o’clock. 
But since time is now running backwards, it should vanish from his hand 
and appear on the platform at five minutes to three - that is, five minutes 
before he places it there. One of his colleagues asks the obvious question: 
‘How can you place it there, then?’ Johnson explains that at three o’clock 
the cube will vanish from the platform and appear in his hand, to be 
placed on the machine. This is exactly what happens. The second colleague 
wants to know what would happen if, after the cube has appeared on the 
platform (five minutes before being placed there), Johnson were to change 
his mind and not put it there at three o’clock. Would this not create a 
paradox? 



182 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


‘An interesting idea,’ Professor Johnson said. ‘I had not thought of it 
and it will be interesting to try. Very well, I shall not . . 

There was no paradox at all. The cube remained. 

But the entire rest of the Universe, professors and all, vanished. 

So, even if all symbolic reality dissolves itself, disappears into nothing, the 
Real - the small cube - will return to its place. This is what Lacan means 
when he says that the ethical imperative is the mode of the presence of 
the Real in the Symbolic: Fiatjustitia, pereat mundus \ The cube must return 
to its place even if all the world, all symbolic reality, perishes. 

But this is just one side of the Lacanian Real; it is the side which 
predominates in the 1550s when we have the Real- the brute, pre-symbolic 
reality which always returns to its place - then the symbolic order which 
structures our perception of reality, and finally the Imaginary, the level of 
illusory entities whose consistency is the effect of a kind of mirror-play - 
that is, they have no real existence but are a mere structural effect. With 
the development of Lacanian teaching in the 1960s and 1570s, what he 
calls ‘the Real’ approaches more and more what he called, in the 1550s, 
the Imaginary. Let us take the case of trauma: in the 1550s, in his first 
seminar, the traumatic event is defined as an imaginary entity which had 
not yet been fully symbolized, given a place in the symbolic universe of 
the subject; 6 but in the 1570s, trauma is real - it is a hard core resisting 
symbolization, but the point is that it does not matter if it has had a place, 
if it has ‘really occurred’ in so-called reality; the point is simply that it 
produces a series of structural effects (displacements, repetitions, and so 
on]. The Real is an entity which must be constructed afterwards so that 
we can account for the distortions of the symbolic structure. 

The most famous Freudian example of such a real entity is of course 
the primal parricide: it would be senseless to search for its traces in prehis- 
toric reality, but it must none the less be presupposed ifwe want to account 

6 Jacques Lacan, ThcSeminarofJ deques Lacan, Book /, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1988, Chapter 22. 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL' 183 


for the present state of things. It is the same with the primal fight to death 
between the (future) master and servant in Hegel’s Phenomenology of Spirit. 
it is senseless trying to determine when this event could have taken place; 
the point is just thit it must be presupposed, that it constitutes a fantasy- 
scenario implied by the very fact that people work - it is the intersubjective 
condition, of the so-called ‘instrumental relation to the world of objects’. 

The paradox of the Lacanian Real, then, is that it is an entity which, 
although it does not exist (in the sense of ‘really existing’, taking place in 
reality), has a series of properties - it exercises a certain structural causality, 
it can produce a series of effects in the symbolic reality of subjects. That 
is why it can be illustrated by a multitude of well-known jokes based on 
the same matrix: ‘Is this the place where the Duke of Wellington spoke 
his famous words?’ - ‘Yes, this is the place, but he never spoke those words’ 
- these never-spoken words are a Lacanian Real. One can quote examples 
ad infinitum-. ‘Smith not only doesn’t believe in ghosts, he isn’t even afraid 
of them!’ ... up to God himself who, according to Lacan, belongs to the 
Real: ‘God has all perfections except one - he doesn’t exist!’ In this sense, 
the Lacanian subjet suppose savoir (the subject presumed to know) is also 
such a real entity: it does not exist, but it produces a decisive shift in the 
development of the psychoanalytic cure. 

To mention the final example: the famous MacGuffrn, the Hitch- 
cockian object, the pure pretext whose sole role is to set the story in motion 
but which is in itself ‘nothing at all’ - the only significance of the MacGuffrn 
lies in the fact that it has some significance for the characters - that it 
must seem to be of vital importance to them. The original anecdote is 
well known: two men are sitting in a train; one of them asks: ‘What’s that 
package up there in the luggage rack?’ ‘Oh, that’s a MacGuffrn.’ ‘What’s 
a MacGuffrn?’ ‘Well, it’s an apparatus for trapping lions in the Scottish 
Highlands.’ ‘But there are no lions in the Scottish Highlands.’ ‘Well, then, 
that’s not a MacGuffrn.’ There is another version which is much more to 
the point: it is the same as the other, with the exception of the last answer: 
‘Well, you see how efficient it is !’ - that’s a MacGuffrn, a pure nothing which 
is none the less efficient. Needless to add, the MacGuffrn is the purest case 



184 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


of what Lacan calls objetpetita: a pure void which functions as the object- 
cause of desire. 

That would be, then, the precise definition of the real object: a cause 
which in itself does not exist - which is present only in a series of effects, 
but always in a distorted, displaced way. If the Real is the impossible, it 
is precisely this impossibility which is to be grasped through its effects. 
Laclau and Mouffe were the first to develop this logic of the Real in its 
relevance for the social-ideological field in their concept of antagonism. 
antagonism is precisely such an impossible kernel, a certain limit which 
is in itself nothing; it is only to be constructed retroactively, from a series 
of its effects, as the traumatic point which escapes them; it prevents a 
closure of the social field. In this way we might reread even the classic 
notion of the 'class struggle’: it is not the last signifier giving meaning to 
all social phenomena (‘all social processes are in the final analysis 
expressions of the class struggle’), but - quite the contrary - a certain 
limit, a pure negativity, a traumatic limit which prevents the final total- 
ization of the social-ideological field. The 'class struggle’ is present only 
in its effects, in the fact that every attempt to totalize the social field, to 
assign to social phenomena a definite place in the social structure, is always 
doomed to failure. 

If we define the Real as such a paradoxical, chimerical entity which, 
although it does not exist, has a series of properties and can produce a 
series of effects, it becomes clear that the Real par excellence is jouissance : 
jouissance does not exist, it is impossible, but it produces a number of 
traumatic effects. This paradoxical nature of jouissance also offers us a clue 
to explaining the fundamental paradox which unfailingly attests the 
presence of the Real: the fact of the prohibition of something which is 
already in itself impossible. The elementary model is, of course, the 
prohibition of incest; but there are many other examples - let us cite only 
the usual conservative attitude towards child sexuality: it does not exist, 
children are innocent beings, that is why we must control them strictly 
and fight child sexuality - not to mention the obvious fact that the most 
famous phrase of all analytical philosophy - the last proposition of 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL? 


185 


Wittgenstein’s Tractatus- implies the same paradox: ‘Whereof one cannot 
speak, thereof one must be silent.’ Immediately, the stupid question arises: 
if it is already stated that it is impossible to say anything about the unspeak- 
able, why add that we must not speak about it? We find the same paradox 
in Kant: when treating the question of the origins of legitimate state power, 
he says directly that we cannot penetrate, the obscure origins of power 
because we should not do so (because by doing so, we put ourselves outside 
its domain and so automatically subvert its legitimacy] - a curious variation 
on his basic ethical imperative Du kannst, denn dusollst!-Yon can, because 
you must! 

The solution to this paradox - why forbid something which is already 
in itself impossible? - lies in the fact that the impossibility relates to the 
level of existence (it is impossible; that is, it doesn’t exist), while the 
prohibition relates to the properties it predicates ( jouissance is forbidden 
because of its properties). 


The forced choice of freedom 

In this sense, we may say that the status of freedom itself is teal. The usual 
‘(post-)structuralist’ approach would be to denounce ‘freedom’ as an imag- 
inary experience resting on misrecognition, on a blindness to the structural 
causality which determines the activity of subjects. But on the basis of 
Lacan’s teaching in the 1970s, we can approach freedom from another 
perspective: freedom, ‘free choice’, as the teal-impossible. 

A few months ago, a Yugoslav student was called to regular military 
service. In Yugoslavia, at the beginning of military service, there is a certain 
ritual: every new soldier must solemnly swear that he is willing to serve 
his country and to defend it even if that means losing his life, and so on 
-the usual patriotic stuff. After the public ceremony, everybody must sign 
the solemn document. The young soldier simply refused to sign, saying 
that an oath depends upon free choice, that it is a matter of free decision, 
and he, from his free choice, did not want to give his signature to the 
oath. But, he was quick to add, if any of the officers present was prepared 



186 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


to give him a formal order to sign the oath, he would of course be prepared 
to do so. The perplexed officers explained to him that because the oath 
depended upon his free decision (an oath obtained by force is valueless), 
they could not give him such an order, but that, on the other hand, ifhe 
still refused to give his signature, he would be prosecuted for refusing to 
do his duty and condemned to prison. Needless to add, this is exactly what 
happened; but before going to prison, the student did succeed in obtaining 
from the military court of law the paradoxical decision, a formal document 
ordering him to sign a free oath . . . 

In the subject’s relationship to the community to which he belongs, 
there is always such a paradoxical point of choix force - at this point, the 
community is saying to the subject: you have freedom to choose, but 
on condition that you choose the right thing; you have, for example, 
the freedom to choose to sign or not to sign the oath, on condition that 
you choose rightly - that is, to sign it. If you make the wrong choice, 
you lose freedom of choice itself And it is by no means accidental that 
this paradox arises at the level of the subject’s relationship to the 
community to which he belongs: the situation of the forced choice 
consists in the fact that the subject must freely choose the community 
to which he already belongs, independent of his choice - he must choose 
what is already given to him. 

The point is that he is never actually in a position to choose: he is 
always treated as ifhe had already chosen. Moreover, contrary to the first 
impression that such a forced choice is a trap by means of which total- 
itarian Power catches its subjects, we must stress that there is nothing 
‘totalitarian’ about it. The subject who thinks he can avoid this paradox 
and really have a free choice is a psychotic subject, one who retains a 
kind of distance from the symbolic order - who is not really caught in 
the signifying network. The ‘totalitarian’ subject is closer to this 
psychotic position: the proof would be the status of the ‘enemy’ in total- 
itarian discourse (the Jew in Fascism, the traitor in Stalinism) - precisely 
the subject supposed to have made a free choice and to have freely chosen 
the wrong side. 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL' 


187 


This is also the basic paradox of love: not only of one’s country, but 
also of a woman or a man. If I am directly ordered to love a woman, it is 
clear that this does not work: in a way, love must be free. But on the other 
hand, if I proceed as if I really have a free choice, if I start to look around ' 
and say to myself ‘Let’s choose which of these women I will fall in love 
with’, it is clear that this also does not work, that it is not ‘real love’. The 
paradox of love is that it is a free choice, but a choice which never arrives 
in the present - it is always already made. At a certain moment, I can only 
state retroactively that I've already chosen. 

Where in philosophical tradition do we find the first formulation of 
this paradox? Late in his life, Kant conceived the choice of Evil as an a 
priori, transcendental act - in this way he tried to explain the sentiment 
we usually have when we find ourselves face to face with an evil person: 
our impression is that his wickedness does not simply depend upon 
circumstances (which are by definition extenuating) but is an integral 
partofhis eternal nature. In other words, ‘wickedness’ appears to be some- 
thing which is irrevocably given-, the person in question can never change 
it, outgrow it via his ultimate moral development. 

On the other hand, however, we have a contradictory sentiment 
according to which the evil person is wholly responsible dot his wickedness, 
although it is integral to his nature - that is, although ‘he was born like 
that’: ‘to be evil’ is not the same as to be stupid, irascible, and other similar 
features pertaining to our psychic nature. Evil is always experienced as 
something pertaining to a free choice, to a decision for which the subject 
has to assume all responsibility. How can we resolve this contradiction 
between the ‘natural’, given character of human Evil and that same Evil 
as pertaining to a free choice? Kant’s solution consists in conceiving the 
choice of Evil, the decision of Evil, as an atemporal, a priori, transcendental 
act: as an act which never took place in temporal reality but none the less 
constitutes the very frame of the subject’s development, of his practical 
activity. 

Lacan was thus quite justified in locating the starting point of the 
‘movement of ideas’ which culminated in the Freudian discovery in Kant’s 



188 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


philosophy, more specifically in his Critique oj Practical Reason . 7 One of the 
consequences of the Kantian revolution in the domain of ‘practical reason’ 
usually passed over in silence was that with Kant, for the first time, Evil 
as such acquired a proper ethical status. That is to say, with his idea of an 
‘original Evil’ inscribed into the atemporal character of a person, Evil 
becomes an affair of principle, an ethical attitude - ‘ethical’ in the exact 
sense of an impetus of the will beyond the pleasure principle (and its 
prolongation, the reality principle). ‘Evil’ is no longer a simple opportunist 
activity taking into account only ‘pathological’ motives (pleasure, profit, 
utility . . .), it is, on the contrary, an affair of the eternal and autonomous 
character of a person pertaining to his original, atemporal choice. This 
again confirms the paradoxical Lacanian conjunction 'Kant avec Sade’, as 
well as the fact that in the epoch of Kant, we witness the resurgence of a 
series of musical and literary figures embodying Evil qua ethical attitude 
(from Mozart’s Don Giovanni to the Byronesque Romantic hero). 

In his Treatise on Human Freedom (1809), Schelling, the ‘acme of German 
idealism’ (Heidegger), radicalized the Kantian theory by introducing a 
crucial distinction between freedom (free choice) and consciousness: the 
atemporal choice by means of which the subject chooses himself as ‘good’ 
or ‘evil’ is an unconscious choice (how can we not recall, apropos of this 
Schellingian distinction, the Freudian thesis concerning the atemporal 
character of the unconscious?). Let us resume Schelling’s line of reasoning. 
Freedom is posited as the cause of Evil - that is, Evil results from a free 
choice of the subject, from his decision for it. If, however, freedom is the 
cause of Evil, how do we account for the innumerable evils, moral and 
physical, which seem notto depend on our conscious will? The only possible 
solution is to presuppose some fundamental choice preceding our conscious 
choices and decisions - in other words, some unconscious choice. 

This solution of Schelling is directed primarily against the subjective 
idealism of Fichte, who reduced the whole range of free activity to the 
self-reflection of consciousness. Schelling’s main counter-argument 

7 Lacan, Tents, pp. 765 6. 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL! 


189 


consists in a delicate psychological observation: sometimes we feel respon- 
sible for a thing without any conscious decision on our part; we feel sinful 
without having effectively sinned; we feel guilty without accomplishing 
the act. This sentiment is, of course, the so-called sentiment of ‘irrational’, 
unfounded guilt, well known in psychoanalysis: the ‘excessive’, ‘inexplic- 
able’ guilt which masks the psychic reality of an unconscious desire. 

Schelling interprets it in the same way: this ‘irrational’ guilt bears 
witness to an unconscious choice, to an unconscious decision for Evil. It 
is as if our game is over before we awaken ourselves into consciousness: 
the basic character of every human being - good or evil - is the result of 
an original, eternal, eternally past, a priori, transcendental choice - that 
is, a choice which was always already made, although it never took place in 
temporal, everyday reality. Such a free unconscious choice must be presup 
posed to account for the sentiment that we are guilty even for things which 
do not depend upon our conscious decision: 

. . . there is, in every man, a feeling that from all eternity, he has been 
what he is, i.e., that he did not become it in course of time. Irrespective 
of the undeniable necessity of all acts and in spite of the fact that every 
person, observing himself, must admit that he is not good or evil by 
chance or by his free will, the evil-doer does not feel himself forced in 
his acts [. . .], but accomplishes them with his will, not against it. N either 
Judas himself nor any other creature could have changed the fact that 
he betrayed Christ, and yet he did not betray him under compulsion 
but willingly and with complete freedom . . . 

... he who says, as if to exculpate himself for an unjust deed: I was 
made like that, is for all that conscious of the fact that he is like that 
by his own fault, although he is also justified to say that it was not 
possible for him to act in any other way. How often it happens that 
already in his childhood when, from an empirical standpoint, we could 
barely attribute to him freedom and discernment, a man attests to 
such a disposition to Evil making possible for us to predict safely that 



190 


THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


he will not give way to any discipline and teaching, i.e., that when he 
matures this disposition will effectively bear the evil fruits we could 
perceive in their seeds; and yet nobody doubts his responsibility, every- 
one is convinced of his fault as if all his particular acts were in his 
power. This universal judgement about a disposition to Evil which is 
consciousless and even irresistible, a judgement rendering it into an 
act of freedom, points towards an act and consequently towards a life 
before this [terrestrial] life. 8 

Is it necessary to point out how this Schellingian determination of an 
original, atemporal choice corresponds perfectly to the Lacanian notion 
of the Real as an act which never took place in reality but which must 
nevertheless be presupposed, ‘constructed’, afterwards to account for the 
present state of things? We could now return to our unfortunate student: 
his deadlock is precisely that of the Schellingian act of freedom. Although, 
in the temporal reality of his life, he never chose his country, he was treated 
as if he had already chosen - as if, in an atemporal, eternally past act, he 
chose what was from the very beginning imposed on him - the allegiance 
to his country. 


Coincidentia oppositorum 

The Real is therefore simultaneously both the hard, impenetrable kernel 
resisting symbolization and a pure chimerical entity which has in itself 
no ontological consistency. To use Kripkean terminology, the Real is the 
rock upon which every attempt at symbolization stumbles, the hard core 
which remains the same in all possible worlds (symbolic universes); but 
at the same time its status is thoroughly precarious; it is something that 
persists only as failed, missed, in a shadow, and dissolves itself as soon as 
we try to grasp it in its positive nature. As we have already seen, this is 

8 F. W. J. Schelling, UiiberdasWesen der menschlichen Freilieit, Frankfurt: Suhrkamp 
Verlag, 1978, pp. 78 9. 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL' 


191 


precisely what defines the notion of a traumatic event: a point of failure 
of symbolization, but at the same time never given in its positivity - it 
can be constructed only backwards, from its structural effects. All its 
effectivity lies in the distortions it produces in the symbolic universe of 
the subject: the traumatic event is ultimately just a fantasy-construct 
filling out a certain void in a symbolic structure and, as such, the retroactive 
effect of this structure. 

There is a series of other oppositions which define the Lacanian concept 
of the Real: 

• We have the Real as the starting point, the basis, the foundation of 
the process ofsymbolization (that is why Lacan speaks of the ‘symbol- 
ization of the Real’) - that is, the Real which in a sense precedes the 
symbolic order and is subsequently structured by it when it gets 
caught in its network: this is the great Lacanian motif of symbol- 
ization as a process which mortifies, drains off, empties, carves the 
fullness of the Real of the living body. But the Real is at the same 
time the product, remainder, leftover, scraps of this process of 
symbolization, the remnants, the excess which escapes symboliza- 
tion and is as such produced by the symbolization itself In Hegelian 
terms, the Real is simultaneously presupposed and posed by the 
symbolic. In so far as the kernel of the Real is jouissance , this duality 
takes the form of a difference between jouissance, enjoyment, and 
plus-dejouir, the surplus-of-enj oying: jouissance is the basis upon 
which symbolization works, the basis emptied, disembodied, 
structured by the symbolization, but this process produces at the 
same time a residue, a leftover, which is the surplus-enjoyment. 

• The Real is the fullness of the inert presence, positivity; nothing is 
lacking in the Real - that is, the lack is introduced only by the symbol- 
ization; it is a signifier which introduces a void, an absence in the 
Real. But at the same time the Real is in itself a hole, a gap, an 
opening in the middle of the symbolic order - it is the lack around 
which the symbolic order is structured. The Real as a starting point, 



192 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 

as a basis, is a positive fullness without lack; as a product, a leftover 
of symbolization, it is, in contrast, the void, the emptiness created, 
encircled by the symbolic structure. We might also approach the 
same pair of opposites from the perspective of negativity: the Real 
is something that cannot be negated, a positive inert datum which 
is insensitive to negation, cannot be caught in the dialectics of nega- 
tivity; but we must add at once that it is so because the Real itself, 
in its positivity, is nothing but an embodiment of a certain void, 
lack, radical negativity. It cannot be negated because it is already in itself, 
in its positivity, nothing but an embodiment of a pure negativity, emptiness. 
That is why the real object is a sublime object in a strict Lacanian 
sense - an object which is just an embodiment of the lack in the 
Other, in the symbolic order. The sublime object is an object which 
cannot be approached too closely: if we get too near it, it loses its 
sublime features and becomes an ordinary vulgar object - it can 
persist only in an interspace, in an intermediate state, viewed from 
a certain perspective, half-seen. If we want to see it in the light of 
day, it changes into an everyday object, it dissipates itself, precisely 
because in itself it is nothing at all. Let us take a well-known scene 
from Fellini’s Roma : the workers digging tunnels for a subway 
find the remnants of some old Roman buildings; they call the archae- 
ologists, and when they enter the buildings together, a marvellous 
view awaits them: walls full of beautiful frescos of immobile, 
melancholic figures - but the paintings are too fragile, they cannot 
withstand the open air and immediately begin to dissolve, leaving 
the spectators alone with the blank walls . . . 

• As Jacques-Alain Miller has already pointed out (in his unpublished 
seminar), the status of the Real is at the same time that of corporeal 
contingency and that of logical consistency. In a first approach, the 
Real is a shock of a contingent encounter which disrupts the auto- 
matic circulation of the symbolic mechanism; a grain of sand 
preventing its smooth functioning; a traumatic encounter which 
ruins the balance of the symbolic universe of the subject. But, as we 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL! 193 


have seen with regard to trauma, precisely as an irruption of a total 
contingency, the traumatic event is nowhere given in its positivity, 
only afterwards can it be logically constructeda.s a point which escapes 
symbolization. 

• If we try to seize the Real from the perspective of the distinction 
between quid and quod, between the properties of a symbolic- 
universal nature attributed to an object and this object itself in its 
givenness, a surplus of an X escaping, in its positivity, the network 
of universal-symbolic determinations - that is, if we try to approach 
the Real through the field opened by the Kripkean criticism of the 
theory of descriptions - we should say, first, that the Real is the 
surplus of quod over quid, a pure positivity beyond the series of prop- 
erties, beyond a set ofdescriptions; but at the same time, the example 
of trauma proves that the Real is also the exact opposite: an entity 
which docs not exist but has nevertheless a series of properties. 

• Finally, if we try to define the Real in its relation to the function of 
writing [ceric, not the post-structuralist e'eriture), we must, of course, 
in a first approach state that the Real cannot be inscribed, that it 
escapes inscription (the Real ofthe sexual relation, for example); but 
at the same time, the Real is the writing itself as opposed to the 
signifier - the Lacanian ecrit has the status of an object, not of a 
signifier. 

This immediate coincidence of opposite or even contradictory determina- 
tions is what defines the Lacanian Real. We can thus differentiate between 
the imaginary, the symbolic and the real status of the couples of opposites. 
In the imagi nary relation, the two poles of opposition are complementary; 
together they build a harmonious totality; each gives the other what the 
other lacks - each fills out the lack in the other (the fantasy of the fully 
realized sexual relationship, for example, where man and woman form a 
harmonious whole). The symbolic relation is, on the contrary, differential: 
the identity ofeach of the moments consists in its difference to the opposite 
moment. A given element does not fill in the lack in the other, it is not 



194 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


complementary to the other but, on the contrary, Cakes the place of the lack 
in the other, embodies what is lacking in the other: its positive presence is 
nothing but an objectification of a lack in its opposite element. The 
opposites, the poles of the symbolic relation, each in a way returns to the 
other its own lack; they are united on the basis of their common lack. 

That would also be the definition of symbolic communication: what 
circulates between the subjects is above all a certain void; the subjects 
pass to each other a common lack. In this perspective a woman is not 
complementary to a man, but she embodies his lack (which is why Lacan 
can say that a beautiful woman is a perfect incarnation of man’s 
castration). Finally, the Real is defined as a point of the immediate coin- 
cidence of the opposite poles: each pole passes immediately into its 
opposite; each is already in itself its own opposite. The only philosophical 
counterpart here is Hegelian dialectics: at the very beginning of his Logic, 
Being and Nothingness are not complementary, neither is Hegel’s point 
that each of them obtains its identity through its difference from the 
other. The point is that Being in itself, when we try to grasp it ‘as it is’, 
in its pure abstraction and indeterminacy, without further specification, 
reveals itself to be Nothingness. 

Another example, perhaps closer to the Lacanian Real, would be Hegel’s 
criticism of Kant’s Thing-in-itself [das Ding-an-sich}. Hegel tries to show 
how this famous Thing-in-itself, this pure surplus of objectivity which 
cannot be reached by thought, this transcending entity, is effectively a 
pure ‘Thing-of-Thought [Gedankending]’ , a pure form of Thought: the 
transcendence of the Thing-in-itself coincides immediately with the pure 
immanence of Thought. That is to say, how do we reach, how do we build 
the idea of a Thing-in-itself? By making an abstraction, by subtracting all 
the particular, concrete determinations of the objectivity which are 
supposed to depend upon our subjectivity - and what remains after this 
abstraction of all particular, determinate contents is precisely a pure, empty 
form of Thought. 

Lacan gives the clue to this paradoxical coincidence of opposites in his 
seminar Encore when he points out that ‘the Real can be inscribed [peat 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL' 


195 


s’inscrire ] only through a deadlock of formalization’. 5 The Real is of course, 
in a first approach, that which cannot be inscribed, which ‘doesn’t cease 
not to inscribe itself [ne cesse pasde ne pas s'ecrire]’ - the rock upon which 
every formalization stumbles. But it is precisely through this failure that 
we can in a way encircle, locate the empty place ofthe Real. In other words, 
the Real cannot be inscribed, but we can inscribe this impossibility itself, 
we can locate its place: a traumatic place which causes a series of failures. 
And Lacan’s whole point is that the Real is nothing this impossibility 
of its inscription: the Real is not a transcendent positive entity, persisting 
somewhere beyond the symbolic order like a hard kernel inaccessible to 
it, some kind of Kantian ‘Thing-in-itself - in itself it is nothing at all, 
just a void, an emptiness in a symbolic structure marking some central 
impossibility. It is in this sense that the enigmatic Lacanian phrase defining 
the subject as an ‘answer of the Real’ is to be understood: we can inscribe, 
encircle the void place of the subject through the failure of his symbol- 
ization, because the subject is nothing but the failure point ofthe process 
of his symbolic representation. 

In the Lacanian perspective, the object as real is then, in the final 
analysis, just a certain limit: we can overtake it, leave it behind us, but 
we cannot reach it. That is the Lacanian reading of the classic paradox 
of Achilles and the tortoise: Achilles can of course overtake her, but he 
cannot reach her, catch up with her. It is like the old Brechtian paradox 
ofhappiness from the Threepenny Opera : you must not run too desperately 
after happiness, because if you do you might overtake it and happiness 
will remain behind you . . . That is the Lacanian Real: a certain limit 
which is always missed - we always come too early or too late. And, as 
the late Michel Silvestre pointed out, the same thing also goes for so- 
called ‘free association’ in psychoanalysis: on the one hand it is impossible 
to reach it, we cannot really spontaneously give ourselves to it, we always 
manipulate, have a certain intention, and so on; but on the other hand 
wecannot escape it, whatever we say during analysis already has the status 


9 Lacan, Le Seminaire XX Encore, p. 85. 



196 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


of free association . 10 For example, I cannot, in the middle of the analysis, 
turn to the analyst and say: ‘Now wait a minute, I want to speak to you 
really seriously, as person to person even if we do this, its performative 
force is already suspended - that is, it already has the status of ‘free 
association’, of something that is to be interpreted, not taken at its face 
value. 


Another Hegelian joke 

What notion of the subject is compatible with this paradoxical character 
of the Real? The basic feature of the Lacanian subject is, of course, its alien- 
ation in the signifier: as soon as the subject is caught in the radically exter- 
nal signifying network he is mortified, dismembered, divided. To get an 
idea of what is meant by the Lacanian division of the subject, one has only 
to remember Lewis Carroll’s well-known paradox: ‘I’m so glad I don’t like 
asparagus,’ said the small girl to a sympathetic friend, ‘because, if I did, I 
should have to eat it - and I can’t bear it!’ Here we have the whole Lacanian 
problem of the reflexivity of desire: desire is always a desire of a desire - 
the question is not immediately ‘What should I desire?’ but ‘There are a 
lot of things that I desire, I have a lot of desires - which of them is worth 
being the object of my desire? Which desire should I desire?’ 

This paradox is literally reproduced in the basic situation of the classic 
Stalinist political processes, in which the accused victim is at the same 
time supposed to confess his love for asparagus (the bourgeoisie, the 
counter-revolution) and express an attitude of disgust towards his own 
activity, to the point of demanding for himself the death penalty. That is 
why the Stalinist victim is the perfect example of the difference between 
the suj et d’ enonce (subject of the statement) and the sujet d’enonciation 
(subject of the enunciation). The demand that the Party is addressing to 
him is: ‘At this moment, the Party needs the process to consolidate the 
revolutionary gains, so be a good Communist, do a last service to the Party 


10 Michel Silvestre, Demain la psychamlyse, Paris: Navarin, 1988. 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL? 


197 


and confess.’ Here we have the division of the subject in its purest form: 
the only way for the accused to confirm himself as a good Communist at the 
level of the sujet d'enonaation is to confess - to determine himself, at the level 
of the sujet d’enonce, as a traitor. Ernesto Laclau was perhaps right when 
he once remarked (in a private conversation) that it is not only Stalinism 
which is a linguistic phenomenon, but language itself which is a Stalinist 
phenomenon. 

Here, however, we must distinguish carefully between this Lacanian 
notion of the divided subject and the ‘post-structuralist’ notion of the 
subject-positions. In ‘post-structuralism’, the subject is usually reduced 
to so-called subjectivation, he is conceived as an effect of a fundamentally 
non-sub jective process: the subject is always caught in, traversed by the 
pre-sub jective process (of'writing’, of'desire’ and so on), and the emphasis 
is on the individuals’ different modes of ‘experiencing’, ‘living’ their 
positions as ‘subjects’, ‘actors’, ‘agents’ of the historical process. For 
example, only at a certain point in European history did the author of 
works of art, a painter or a writer, begin to see himself as a creative indi- 
vidual who, in his work, gives expression to his interiorsubjectiverichness. 
The great master of such analysis was, of course, Foucault: one might say 
that the main point of his late work was to articulate the different modes 
by which individuals assume their subject-positions. 

But with Lacan, we have quite another notion of the subject. To put it 
simply: if we make an abstraction, if we subtract all the richness of the 
different modes of subjectivation, all the fullness of experience present in 
the way the individuals are ‘living’ their subject-positions, what remains 
is an empty place which was filled out with this richness; this original 
void, this lack of symbolic structure, is the subject, the subject of the 
signifier. The subject is therefore to be strictly opposed to the effect of 
subjectivation: whatthesubjectivationmasks is not apre- or trans-sub jective 
process of writing but a lack in the structure, a lack which is the subject. 

Our predominant idea of the subject is, in Lacanian terms, that of the 
‘subject of the signified’, the active agent, the bearer of some signification 
who is trying to express himself in language. Lacan's starting point is, of 



198 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


course, that symbolic representation always distorts the subject, that it is 
always a displacement, a failure - that the subject cannot find a signifier 
which would be ‘his own’, that he is always saying too little or too much: 
in short, something other than what he wanted or intended to say. 

The usual conclusion from this would be that the subject is some 
kind of interior richness of meaning which always exceeds its symbolic 
articulation: ‘language cannot express fully what I’m trying to say . . 
The Lacanian thesis is the opposite: this surplus of signification masks 
a fundamental lack. The subject of the signifier is precisely this lack, 
this impossibility of finding a signifier which would be ‘its own’: the 
failure of its representation is its positive condition. The subject tries to 
articulate itself in a signifying representation; the representation fails; 
instead of a richness we have a lack, and this void opened by the failure 
is the subject of the signifier. To put it paradoxically: the subject of the 
signifier is a retroactive effect of.the failure of its own representation; 
that is why the failure of representation is the only way to represent it 
adequately. 

Here we have a kind of dialogic economy: we articulate a proposition 
defining the subject, our attempt fails, we experience the absolute 
contradiction, the extreme negative relationship between the subject and 
the predicate - and this absolute discordance is the subject as absolute 
negativity. It is like a well-known Soviet joke about Rabinovitch, a Jew 
who wants to emigrate. The bureaucrat at the emigration office asks him 
why; Rabinovitch answers: ‘There are two reasons why. The first is that 
I’m afraid that in the Soviet Union the Communists will lose power, 
there will be a counter-revolution and the new power will put all the 
blame for the Communist crimes on us, Jews - there will again be anti- 
Jewish pogroms . . . ’ ‘But’, interrupts the bureaucrat, ‘this is pure 
nonsense, nothing can change in the Soviet Union, the power of the 
Communists will last for ever!’ ‘Well,’ responds Rabinovitch calmly, 
'that’s my second reason.’ The logic is the same here as in the Hegelian 
proposition ‘the spirit is a bone’: the very failure of the first reading gives 
us the true meaning. 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL! 199 


The Rabinovitch joke also exemplifies the logic of the ill-famed Hegelian 
triad: if the first reason for emigrating is the ‘thesis’ and the bureaucrat’s 
objection the ‘anti-thesis’, then the ‘synthesis’ is not any kind of return to 
the thesis, some kind of healing of the wound made by the anti-thesis - the 
‘synthesis' is exactly thesame as the anti-thesis, the only difference lies in a certain 
change of perspective, in a certain turn through which what was a moment 
ago experienced as an obstacle, as an impediment, proves itself to be a positive 
condition: the fact that Soviet power is eternal, which was proposed as an 
argument against emigrating, reveals itself as the real reason ybrernigrating. 

This is also, in a nutshell, the logic of the ‘negation of the negation’: 
this double, self-referential negation does not entail any kind of return 
to positive identity, any kind of abolition, of cancellation of the disruptive 
force of negativity, of reducing it to a passing moment in the self-mediating 
process of identity; in the ‘negation of the negation’, the negativity 
preserves all its disruptive power; the whole point is just that we come to 
experience how this negative, disruptive power, menacing our identity, is 
simultaneously a positive condition of it. The ‘negation of the negation’ 
does not in any way abolish the antagonism, it consists only in the expe- 
rience of the fact that this immanent limit which is preventing me from 
achieving my full identity with myself simultaneously enables me to 
achieve a minimum of positive consistency, however mutilated it is. To 
give a most elementary example: in the anti-Semitic vision, the Jew is 
experienced as the embodiment of negativity, as the force disrupting stable 
social identity - but the ‘truth’ of anti-Semitism is, of course, that the very 
identity of our position is structured through a negative relationship to 
this traumatic figure of the Jew. Without the reference to the Jew who is 
corroding the social fabric, the social fabric itself would be dissolved. In 
other words, all my positive consistency is a kind of'reaction-formation’ 
to a certain traumatic, antagonistic kernel: if I lose this ‘impossible’ point 
of reference, my very identity dissolves. 

This, then, is the ‘negation of the negation’: not a kind of ‘superseding’ 
of negativity but the experience of the fact that the negativity as such has a 
positive function, enables and structures our positive consistency. In simple 



200 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


negation, there is still the pre-given positive identity which is being 
negated, the movement of negativity is still conceived as the limitation 
of some pre-given positivity; while in the ‘negation of the negation’, nega- 
tivity is in a way prior to what is being negated, it is a negative movement 
which opens the very place where every positive identity can be situated. 

If, then, antagonism is always a kind of opening, a hole in the field of 
the symbolic Other, a void of an unanswered, unresolved question, the 
‘negation of the negation' does not bring us the final answer filling out 
the void of all questions: it is to be conceived more like a paradoxical twist 
whereby the question itself begins to function as its own answer, what we 
mistook for a question was already an answer. To explain this, let us take 
an example from Adorno concerning the antagonistic character of society. 11 
Adorno starts from the fact that today it is not possible to formulate one 
appropriate definition of Society: as soon as we set to work, a number of 
opposing, mutually excluding determinations present themselves: on the 
one hand those which lay stress upon Society as an organic whole encom- 
passing individuals; on the other those which conceive Society as a bond, 
a kind of contract between atomized individuals - in short, we find ourselves 
caught in the opposition between ‘organicism’ and ‘individualism’. 

In a first approach, this opposition presents itself as an epistemological 
obstacle, as a hindrance preventing us from grasping Society as it is in itself 
- making out of Society a kind of Kantian Thing-in-itself which can be 
approached only through partial, distorted insights: its real nature escapes 
us for ever. But in a dialectical approach, this contradiction which appears at 
first as an unresolved question is already in itself a solution: far from barring 
our access to the real essence of Society, the opposition between ‘organicism’ 
and ‘individualism’ is not only epistemological but is already at work in the 
‘Thing-in-itself. In other words, the antagonism between Society as a corporate 
Whole transcending its members and Society as an external, ‘mechanical’ net 
connecting atomized individuals is the fundamental antagonism of 
contemporary society, it is in a way its very definition. 


11 Theodor W. Adorno, ‘Society’, Salmagundi w 11,1970. 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL? 201 


This is what is basically at stake in the Hegelian strategy: the discordance, 
the incompatibility as such (of the opposing determinations of Society) makes 
thesecret disappear- what at first appeared to be an epistemological obstacle 
turns out to be the very index of the fact that we have ‘touched the Truth’, 
we are in the heart of the ‘Thing-in-itself by the very trait which appeared 
to bar our access to it. The implication, of course, is that this ‘Thing-in-itself 
is already mutilated, split, marked by a radical lack, structured around an 
antagonistic kernel. 

This Hegelian strategy of transposing an epistemological impotence 
(the way we necessarily entangle ourselves in a contradiction when we try 
to define Society) into an ontological impossibility (into an antagonism 
defining the object itself) implies the same twist as the Rabinovitchjoke: 
what appears at first to be an obstacle reveals itself as the solution - in 
the very movement by which the truth escapes us, we already rejoin it: 
‘truth grabs error by the scruff of the neck in the mistake ’. 12 Such a 
paradoxical space, in which the very heart of a certain field immediately 
touches its exterior, is best exemplified by a well-known Hegelian dictum 
according to which the secrets of the ancient Egyptians were also secrets 
for the Egyptians themselves: the solution of the riddle is to redouble it. 

When a subject is confronted with an enigmatic, impenetrable Other, 
the thing he has to grasp is that his question to the Other is already the 
question of the Other itself- the impenetrability of the substantial Other, 
the hindrance which is preventing the subject from penetrating the heart 
of the Other, is immediately an index of the fact that this Other is already 
in itself hindered, structured around a certain ‘indigestible’ rock, resisting 
symbolization, symbolic integration. The subject cannot grasp Society as 
aclose Whole, but this impotence has, so to speak, an immediate ontological 
status: it bears witness to the fact that Society itself does not exist, that it 
is marked by a radical impossibility. And it is because of this impossibility 
to achieve full identity with itself that the Other, Society as Substance, is 
already subject. 


12 Lacan, T he Seminar af Jacques Lacan, Book /, p. 265. 



202 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


Subject as an 'answer of the Real’ 

What, then, is the status of this subject before subjectivation? The Lacanian 
answer would be, roughly speaking, that before subjectivation as identifi- 
cation, before ideological interpellation, before assuming a certain subject- 
position, the subject is subject of a question. At first sight, it may seem that 
we are here again in the middle of traditional philosophical problematics: 
subject as a force of negativity which can question every given, objective 
status of things, introducing into the positivity the openness of the ques- 
tioning ... in a word, the subject is a question. But the Lacanian position 
is the exact opposite: the subject is not a question, it is as an answer, the 
answer of the Real to the question asked by the big Other, the symbolic 
order . 15 It is not the subject which is asking the question; the subject is the 
void of the impossibility of answering the question of the Other. 

T o explain this, let us refer to an interesting book by Aron Bodenheimer: 
Why? On the Obscenity of Questioning. Its fundamental thesis is that there 
is something obscene in the very act of asking a question, without regard 
to its content. It is the form of the question as such which is obscene: the 
question lays open, exposes, denudes its addressee, it invades his sphere 
of intimacy; this is why the basic, elementary reaction to a question is 
shame on the bodily level, blushing and lowering our eyes, like a child of 
whom we ask ‘What were you doing?’ It is clear in our everyday experience 
that such a questioning of children is a priori incriminating, provoking 
a sensation of guilt: 'What were you doing? Where were you? What does 
this white spot mean?' Even if I can offer an answer which is objectively 
true and at the same time delivers me from guilt (‘I was studying with 
my friend’, for example), the guilt is already admitted on the level of desire; 
every answer is an excuse. With a prompt answer like ‘I was studying with 
my friend’ I am confirming precisely that I did not really want to do so, 
that my desire was to stroll about, or something of that nature . . . 


13 Jacques Alain Miller, ‘Les Reponses dureel’, in Aspects du malaise dans la civilisation, 
Paris: Navarin, 1987. 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL! 203 


Questioning is the basic procedure of the totalitarian intersub jective 
relationship: one need not refer to such exemplary cases as police inter- 
rogation or religious confession; it is quite sufficient to recall the usual 
abuse ofthe enemy in the real-socialist press: how much more threatening 
is the question ‘Who is really hiding behind . . . [the demands for the free- 
dom of the press, for democracy]? Who is really pulling the strings of the 
so-called new social movements? Who is really speaking through them?’ 
than the vulgar, direct positive affirmation: 'Those who demand the free- 
dom of the press really want to open the space for the activity of counter- 
socialist powers and in this way diminish the hegemony of the working 
class . . Totalitarian power is not a dogmatism which has all the answers; 
it is, on the contrary, the instance which has all the questions. 

The basic indecency of the question consists in its drive to put into 
words what should be left unspoken, as in the well-known dialogue: ‘What 
were you doing?’ ‘You know what!’ ‘Yes, but I want you to tell me!’ Which 
is the instance in the other, in its addressee, that the question is aiming 
at? It aims at a point at which the answer is not possible, where the word 
is lacking, where the subject is exposed in his impotence. We can illustrate 
this by the inverse type of question, not the question of the authority to 
its subjects but the question of the subject-child to his father: the stake 
of such a question is always to catch the other who embodies authority 
in his impotence, in his inability, in his lack. 

Bodenheimer articulates this dimension apropos of the child’s question, 
to the father: ‘Father, why is the sky blue?’ - the child is not really interested 
in the sky as such; the real stake of the question is to expose father’s impo- 
tence, his helplessness in the face of the hard fact that the sky is blue, his 
incapacity to substantiate this fact, to present the whole chain of reasons 
leading to it. The blue of the sky thus becomes not only the father’s 
problem, but in a way even his fault: ‘The sky is blue, and you’re just 
staringatitlikeanidiot, incapable ofdoing anything about it!’ A question, 
even if it refers only to a given state of things, always makes the subject 
formally responsible for it, although only in a negative way - responsible, 
that is, for his impotence in the face of this fact. 



204 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


What, then, is this point in the other at which the word fails, this point 
of impotence at which the question as such is aiming? The question as such 
creates shame because it aims at my innermost, intimate kernel called by 
Freud Km unseres Wesens and by Lacan das Ding-, at that strange body in my 
interior which is 'in me more than me’, which is radically interior and at the 
same time already exterior and for which Lacan coined a new word, ex time. 
The real object of the question is what Plato, in the Symposium, called - through 
the mouth of Alcibiades - agalma, the hidden treasure, the essential object 
in me which cannot be objectivated, dominated. (Lacan develops this concept 
in his unpublished Seminar VIII on Transference.) The Lacanian formula for 
this object is of course objetpetita, this point of Real in the very heart of the 
subject which cannot be symbolized, which is produced as a residue, a 
remnant, a leftover of every signifying operation, a hard core embodying 
horrifying jouissance, enjoyment, and as such an object which simultaneously 
attracts and repels us - which divides our desire and thus provokes shame. 

Our thesis is that it is precisely the question in its obscene dimension, 
in so far as it aims at the ex-timate kernel, at what is in the subject more 
than subject, at the object in subject which is constitutive for the subject. 
In other words there is no subject without guilt, the subject exists only 
in so far as he is ashamed because of the object in himself, in its interior. 
This is the meaning of Lacan’s thesis that the subject is originally split, 
divided: he is divided as to the object himself, as to the Thing, which at 
the same time attracts and repels him: J? Oa. 

Let us resume: the subject is an answer of the Real (of the object, of 
the traumatic kernel) to the question of the Other. The question as such 
produces in its addressee an effect of shame and guilt, it divides, it hysteri- 
cizes him, and this hystericization is the constitution of the subject: the 
status of the subject as such is hysterical. The subject is constituted 
through his own division, splitting, as to the object in him; this object, 
this traumatic kernel, is the dimension that we have already named as 
that of a ‘death drive’, of a traumatic imbalance, a rooting out. Man as 
such is ‘nature sick unto death’, derailed, run off the rails through a 
fascination with a lethal Thing. 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL? 205 


The process of interpellation-subjectivation is precisely an attempt to 
elude, to avoid this traumatic kernel through identification: in assuming 
a symbolic mandate, in recognizing himself in the interpellation, the 
subject evades the dimension of the Thing. (There are, of course, other 
possibilities of avoiding this hysterical deadlock: the perverse position, for 
example, in which the subject identifies himself immediately with the 
object and thus relieves himself of the burden of the question. Psycho- 
analysis itself also de-hystericizes the subject, but in another way: at the 
end of the psychoanalysis the question is, so to speak, returned to the 
Other, the impotence of the subject displaces itself into the impossibility 
proper to the Other: the subject experiences the Other as blocked, failed, 
marked with a central impossibility - in brief, as ‘antagonistic’.) 

The subject, then, as an impossible answer, consubstantive with a 
certain guilt - the first literary association which comes to our mind is of 
course the work of Franz Kafka. Indeed, we might say that Kafka’s achieve- 
ment is to articulate this paradoxical status of the subject before subjec- 
tivation - we were speaking of shame, and the last words of The Trial are 
'it was as if he meant the shame of it to outlive him .' 14 

This is why we find in Kafka’s work the reverse, disquieting side of the 
comical aspect of the interpellation: the illusion proper to interpellation, 
the illusion of ‘already-there’, shows its negative face. The procedure of 
incrimination is to put the subject into the position of somebody who is 
already presumed to know (to use this Lacanian term in another context). For 
example, in The Trial Josef K. is summoned to appear before the Court on 
Sunday morning: the exact time of interrogation is not specified. When 
he finally finds the courtroom, the judge reproaches him: ‘You should 
have been here an hour and five minutes ago .’’ 5 Some of us probably 
remember the same situation from army service: the corporal incriminates 
us from the very beginning with the cry: ‘What are you staring at like 
idiots? Don’t you know what to do? One really has to explain things to you again and again!’ - and he then proceeds to give us instructions as if 
they were superfluous, as if we should already know them. This, therefore, 
is the reverse side of the ideological ‘already-there’ illusion: the subject is 
incriminated by suddenly being thrown into a situation in which he is 
presumed to know what is expected of him. 


S(4 a, <j) 

How do we specify the dimension of this ‘object in subject’ which causes 
the presumption of knowledge? That is to say, there are objects and objects 
- in Lacan’s teaching, we have to distinguish at least three types of object. 
To articulate these distinctions, let us return to the MacGuffin - we must 
not forget that in Hitchcock’s films, too, the MacGuffin is just one of three 
types of object: 

• First, then, the MacGuffin itself, ‘nothing at all’, an empty place, a 
pure pretext for setting the action in motion: the formula of the 
aircraft engines 'mTheThirty-Nine Steps, the secret clause of the naval 
treaty in The Foreign Correspondent, the coded melody in The Lady 
Vanishes, the uranium bottles in Notorious, and so on. It is a pure 
semblance: in itself it is totally indifferent and, by structural 
necessity, absent; its signification is purely auto-reflexive, it consists 
in the fact that it has some signification for others, for the principal 
characters of the story. 

• But in a series of Hitchcock’s films, we find another type of object 
which is decidedly not indifferent, not pure absence: what matters 
here is precisely its presence, the material presence of a fragment of 
reality - it is a leftover, remnants which cannot be reduced to a 
network of formal relations proper to the symbolic structure, but 
it is paradoxically, at the same time, the positive condition for the 
effectuation of the formal structure. We can define this object as an 
object of exchange circulating among subjects, serving as a kind of 
guarantee, pawn, on their symbolic relationship. It is the role of the 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL' 207 


key in Notorious and Dial M for Murder, the role of the wedding ring 
in Shadow of a Doubt and Rear Window, the tole of the lighter in 
Strangers onaTrain, and even the role ofthe child circulating between 
the two couples in The Man Who Knew Too Much. It is unique, non- 
specular; it has no double, it escapes the dual mirror-relation - that 
is why it plays a crucial role in those very films which are built on 
a whole series of dual relations, each element having its mirror- 
counterpart [Strangers on a Train; Shadow of a Doubt, where the name 
of the central character is already redoubled - uncle Charlie, niece 
Charlie): it is the one which has no counterpart, and that is why it 
must circulate between the opposite elements. The paradox of its 
role is that although it is a leftover of the Real, an ‘excrement’, it 
functions as a positive condition of the restoration of a symbolic 
structure: the structure of symbolic exchanges between the subjects 
can take place only in so far as it is embodied in this pure material 
element which acts as its guarantee - for example, in Strangers on a 
Tram the murderous pact between Bruno and Guy holds only in so 
far as the object (the cigarette lighter) is circulating between them. 

That is the basic situation in a whole series of Hitchcock’s films: at the 
beginning we have a non-structured, pre-symbolic, imaginary homeostatic 
state of things, an indifferent balance in which the relations between 
subjects are not yet structured in a strict sense - that is, through the lack 
circulating between them. And the paradox is that this symbolic pact, this 
structural network of relations, can establish itself only in so far as it is 
embodied in a totally contingent material element, a little-bit-of-Real 
which, by its sudden irruption, disrupts the homeostatic indifference of 
relations between subjects. In other words, the imaginary balance changes 
into a symbolically structured network through a shock of the Real . 14 That 
is why Hitchcock (and with him Lacan) is no longer a ‘structuralist’: the 
basic gesture of ‘structuralism’ is to reduce the imaginary richness to a 

1 6 Mladen Dolar, 'Hitchcock’s Objekc', Woes wan, Ljubljana Vienna, 1986. 



208 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


formal network of symbolic relations: what escapes the structuralist 
perspective is that this formal structure is itself tied by an umbilical cord 
to some radically contingent material element which, in its pure partic- 
ularity, ‘is’ a structure, embodies it. Why? Because the big Other, the 
symbolic otder, is always barre, failed, crossed out, mutilated, and the 
contingent material element embodies this internal blockage, limit, of 
the symbolic structure. 

The symbolic structure must include an element which embodies its 
‘stain’, its own point of impossibility around which it is articulated: in a 
way it is the structuring of its own impossibility. The only philosophical 
counterpoint to this logic is again Hegelian dialectics: the greatest spec- 
ulative mystery of the dialectical movement is not how the richness and 
diversity of reality can be reduced to a dialectical conceptual mediation, 
but the fact that in order to take place this dialectical structuring must 
itself be embodied in some totally contingent element - that, for example, 
is the point of the Hegelian deduction of the role of the King: the State as 
the rational totality exists effectively only in so far as it is embodied in 
the inert presence of the King’s body: the King, in his non-rational, 
biologically determined presence, ‘is’ the State, it is in his body that the 
State achieves its effectiveness. 

Here we can use the distinction, developed by Ladau and Mouffe, 
between the accidental and the contingent: an ordinary element of a formal 
structure is accidental, indifferent - that is, it can be interchanged; but 
there is always an element which, paradoxically, embodies this formal 
structure as such - it is not necessary but it is, in its very contingency, the 
positive condition of the restoration of the structural necessity: this 
necessity depends upon it, hangs on it. 

• Finally, we have a third kind of object: the birds in The Birds, for 
example (we could also add, in Mamie, the body of the giant ship at 
the end of the street in which Mamie’s mother lives). This object 
has a massive, oppressive material presence; it is not an indifferent 
void like the MacGuffin, but at the same time it does not circulate 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL! 209 


between the subjects, it is not an object of exchange, it is just a mute 
embodiment of an impossible jouissance. 

How can we explain the logic, the consistency of these three objects? In 
his Seminar Encore, Lacan proposes a schema of it : 17 


Imaginary 



a 


Here, we have to interpret the vector not as indicating a relation of 
determination (‘the Imaginary determines the Symbolic’ and so on), 
but more in the sense of the ‘symbolization of the Imaginary’. So: 

• the MacGuffm is clearly the objetpedta, the lack, the leftover of the 
Real, setting in motion the symbolic movement of interpretation, 
a void in the centre of the symbolic order, a pure semblance of the 
‘mystery’ to be explained, interpreted; 

• the birds are cj), the impassive, imaginary objectification ofthe Real, 
an image which embodies jouissance-, 

• and finally, the circulating object of exchange is S($), the symbolic 
object which cannot be reduced to imaginary mirror-play and which 
at the same time embodies the lack in the Other, the impossibility 
around which the symbolic order is structured. It is the radically 
contingent element through which the symbolic necessity arises. 
That is the greatest mystery of the symbolic order: how its necessity 


17 Lacan, Le Semimire XX Encore, p. 83. 



210 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


arises from the shock of a totally contingent encounter of the Real 
- like the well-known accident in the Arabian Nights: the hero, lost 
in the desert, quite by chance enters a cave; there, he finds three old 
wise men, awoken by his entry, who say to him: ‘Finally, you have 
arrived! We have been waiting for you for the last three hundred 
years.’ 

The subject presumed to .. . 

This mystery is, in the final analysis, the mystery of the transference itself 
to produce new meaning, it is necessary to presuppose its existence in the 
other. That is the logic of the ‘subject presumed to know’ which Lacan 
isolated as the central axis, anchor, of the phenomenon of transference: 
the analyst is presumed to know in advance - what? - the meaning of 
the analysand’s symptoms. This knowledge is of course an illusion, but 
it is a necessary one: in the end only through this supposition of 
knowledge can some real knowledge be produced. In the scheme above 
we have three versions of the object around the central nauseous 
protuberance of jouissance, the Thing in its inaccessibility; one is tempted 
to construct, on the same matrix, three other concepts around the subject 
presumed to know. 

• Let us start with the subject presumed to believe .' 1 Coming from 
Yugoslavia - that is, from a real-socialist country - the author of 
this book is tempted to take an example typical of ‘really existing 
socialism’ where, as is well known, there is always something lacking 
in the shops. Our hypothetical starting point is that there is an 
abundance of toilet paper on the market. But, suddenly and unex- 
pectedly, a rumour starts to circulate that there is a shortage of toilet 
paper - because of this rumour, people frantically begin to buy it, 


18 Rastko Mocnik, ‘Ueber die Bedeutung der Chimaren fur die conditio humana’, Wo 
es war 1, Ljubjana Vienna, ig8 6 . 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL' 211 


and of course the result is that there is a real shortage of toilet paper. 
At first sight this seems to be a simple mechanism of what is called 
self-fulfilling prophecy, but the effective way in which it functions 
is a little more complicated. Each participant reasons as follows: ‘I’m 
not naive and stupid, I know very well that there is more than 
enough toilet paper in the shops; but there are probably some naive 
and stupid people who believe these rumours, who take them 
seriously and will act accordingly - they will start frantically buying 
toilet paper and so in the end there will be a real shortage of it; so 
even if I know very well that there is enough, it would be a good 
idea to go and buy a lotl’The crucial point is that this other presumed 
to believe naively does not have to exist effectively: to produce his 
effects in reality, it is enough that he is presumed by others to exist. 
In a definite, closed multitude of subjects, each person can play this 
role for all the others - the effect will be exactly the same: a real 
shortage of toilet paper. The one who will in the end remain without 
it will be precisely the one who persists in the truth: the one who 
says to himself, 'I know that this is only a rumour, there is enough 
toilet paper’ and acts upon it . . . 

This concept of the subject presumed to believe also has its clinical use: 
it serves to mark the difference between real Freudian analysis and the 
revisionist cure. While in Freudian analysis the analyst plays the role of 
the subject presumed to know, in the revisionist tradition his role is 
closer to that of the subject presumed to believe; that is to say, in this 
case the reasoning of the patient goes as follows: T have some psychic 
problems, I’m neurotic, so I need an analyst to cure me. The problem is 
that I don’t believe in maternal phallus, symbolic castration and all that 
shit - to me this is plain nonsense. But happily for me, here is an analyst 
who believes in it and, why not, perhaps he can cure me with his belief!’ 
No wonder various neo-Freudian schools try to incorporate some 
elements of shamanism! 



212 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


• The second concept in this series would be the subject presumed to enjoy , 15 
His role is fundamental in obsessional neurosis: for the obsessional 
neurotic the traumatic point is the supposed existence, in the other, 
of an insupportable, limitless, \iomfymg jouissance-, the stake of all his 
frantic activity is to protect, to save the Other from his jouissance, even 
at the price of destroying him or her (saving the woman from her 
corruption, for example]. Again, this subject does not have to exist 
effectively: to produce his effects, it is enough for others to presume 
that he exists. This supposed jouissance is one of the key components 
of racism: the Other (Jew, Arab, Negro) is always presumed to have 
access to some specific enjoyment, and that is what really bothers us. 

• The last concept would be, of course, that of the subject presumed to 
desire. If the subject presumed to enjoy plays a central role in obses- 
sional neurosis, the subject presumed to desire plays such a role in 
hysteria. One only has to remind oneself of Freud’s analysis of Dora: 
it is quite clear that Frau K. is playing for Dora the role - not of her 
object of desire, as Freud mistakenly supposed, but of the subject 
presumed to desire, presumed to know how to organize her desire, 
how to avoid its deadlock. That is why, when we are confronted with 
a hysteric, the question to ask is not ‘What is his object of desire?’ 
but ‘Where does he desire from? Who is the other person through 
whom he is organizing his desire?’ The problem for the hysterical 
subject is that he always needs to have recourse to another subject 
to organize his desire - that is the meaning of the Lacanian formula 
that hysterical desire is the desire of the other. 


The presumed knowledge 

This conceptual quartet is useful in an analysis ofideological mechanisms: 
in oriental despotism, the whole system pivots around the central point, 
the figure of the despot presumed to enjoy; in classical Stalinism, the 

19 Mladen Dolar, 'Die Einfuhrung in das Serail’, Woes war} 4, Ljubljana Vienna, 1987. 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL? 


213 


leadership is presumed to know; and so on. But the thing to remember 
is that the four subjects presumed to . . . are not on the same level: the 
subject presumed to know is their basis, their matrix, and the function 
of the remaining three is precisely to disguise its troubling paradox. 

The link between this presumed knowledge and the unconscious is 
best exemplified by a small scene from Hitchcock’s Foreign Correspondent. 
The hero (played by Joel McCrea) and his friend design an elaborate plot 
to extort from a Nazi agent posing as a ‘pacifist’ (Herbert Marshall) a 
confession of his betrayal. The hero, already half in love with the traitor’s 
beautiful daughter, entices her on to an all-day excursion to the country- 
side; meanwhile, his friend visits the traitor at his home and tells him 
that he and the hero have abducted his daughter - they are prepared to 
return her in exchange for his written confession that he is a Nazi agent. 
The father assents to the demand, writes something on a piece of paper - 
obviously the requested confession - and hands it over to the extortioner, 
but when the latter glances at it, he sees that it reads: ‘Sorry, but I’ve just 
heard my daughter’s car entering the garage’. The gallantry of the father 
(who, despite his treason, remains a gentleman of the old school) prevents 
him from simply flying into a temper after he hears the approaching car 
and so unmasks the extortioner’s bluff he continues calmly with his job 
and lets the extortioner know that he has seen through his cards in the 
very form of the confession. 

What is the libidinal charge of this gesture? The treacherous father 
from Foreign Correspondent is one in the series of Hitchcockian villains 
gnawed by the knowledge of their own corruption: unconsciously, they 
desire unmasking and self-destruction; this truth emerges, articulates 
itself in the form of the confession, persisting even when the reasons for 
it proved invalid. This is the ‘unconscious’ in the Lacanian sense: a desire 
which articulates itself in the very gap separatingthe form from its content, 
in the autonomy of the form. Behind the ironic-gallant gesture of the 
father addressed to the extortioner (meaning something like: ‘Here you 
have the confession you wanted! I’m giving you back your own cards!’) 
there is a desperate eruption of the desire for self-purification, a desire 



214 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


which realizes itself towards the end of the film with the father’s suicidal 
act. 

The word ‘gallantry’ was not used carelessly: it has to be conceived in 
its precise Rococo-pre-Romantic, Mozarrian meaning. That is to say, one 
of the most subversive features of Mozart’s operas consists precisely in the 
adroit manipulation of the gap between form and content, where it is the 
form which articulates the ‘repressed’ truth of the content. Leaving aside 
Don Giovanni, which is in its entirety the embodiment of this gap (on the 
level of ‘content’, Don Giovanni runs from one fiasco to another, while 
the musical form emphasizes more and more his triumphalism, his myth- 
ical power), it is sufficient to recall a small detail from the finale of Lenozze 
di Figaro, the aria which follows the reconciliation between Figaro and 
Susanna (‘Pace, pace . . .’). At first, form and content accord with each other: 
the elucidation of the misunderstanding (Figaro knew that the woman 
he was making a conquest of was not the Countess but his beloved Susanna 
dressed up as the Countess) is confirmed by their harmonized duet which 
attests to their reconcilation; this duet then changes into a trio: from the 
background breaks in the angry voice of the Count looking for Susanna 
in the park (to entrap him, she had promised him a rendezvous). 

With this emergence of a third voice, form and content split, each goes 
its own way: on the level of content, we have tension, disharmony, contrast- 
ing with the former spirit of reconciliation (the Count angrily asking what 
Susanna is up to), but what is crucial is the fact that the Count articulates 
his anger in the very melody used by Figaro and Susanna to express their reconcil- 
iation-on the level of form there is no discontinuity, no rupture, the same 
melodic line simply goes on ... In this way, all is actually said: the recon- 
cdiation is already here, the Count’s tension is already pacified, he has already 
lost, he simply does not yet know it, or, more precisely - and this is the 
crucial point - he does not knowyet that he already knows it, because uncon- 
sciously he does already know it, he is already pacified, resigned to the 
loss of Susanna. His unconscious knowledge erupts again precisely in the 
gap between form and content - in the form which already announces 
reconciliation while the Count is still full of fury. 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL! 215 


It is because of this gap that Mozart is not yet a Romantic composer: 
such a gap is excluded by the very definition of ‘Romantic’. From the 
Romantic perspective, Mozart’s procedure appears ‘mechanical’, psycho- 
logically unconvincing, an automatic repetition of the same melodic line 
irrespective of the changed psychological constellation: as if Mozart has 
‘forgotten to change the tonality’ and mechanically continued with the 
same melody, although the psychological truth of the situation demanded 
a clear break (an eruption ofdisharmony). Far from being simply erroneous, 
this impression of an ‘automatism to repeat’ asserting itself irrespective 
of the ‘psychological truth’hastobe interpreted onthebasisofthe Lacanian 
thesis that the status of the unconscious ‘compulsion to repeat’ is not 
psychological: the very external form of the Count’s melody, its discord 
with its own content (the words sung), articulates the unconscious truth 
as yet inaccessible to him, to his psychological experience. 

In Mozart, we still have the ‘unconscious’ as the network of external, 
‘non-psychological’ symbolic relations which decide on the ‘truth’ of the 
subjects caught in it: in the very restraining, holding back, in preventing 
the subjective-psychological content from ‘expressing’ itself too strongly in 
the form, from permeating the form too directly - in this very keeping the 
content at a distance from the form - the ‘repressed’ truth of the content 
finds room to articulate itself We enter the ‘romantic’ mode the moment 
the external, ‘mechanical’ form is experienced as ‘mere form’, form without 
its own content: hence truth is measured exclusively by the expression of 
the psychological subjectivity in the form. In Beethoven we find the subject 
as the infinite wealth of inner content which struggles to express itself in 
the form: the way is open for the Romantic cult of a ‘genius’, of a ‘titanic’ 
personality, and all the disgusting phantoms resulting therefrom. 


'The fear of error is. .. the error itself 

Contrary to the usual parallel between Kant-Mozart on one side and Hegel- 
Beethovenon the other, we should stress that hereHegel isMozartian. That 
is to say, this Mozartian practice of articulating the truth by the very 



216 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


distance of the form from its content finds its exact counterpart in Hegel’s 
notion of the ‘formal side [das Fonnelle]’ articulating the truth of a given 
phenomenon. This, of course, introduces a dialectical relation between 
Truth and appearance: ‘Truth’ is definitely not a kind of surplus eluding 
us again and again; it appears, on the contrary, in the form of traumatic 
encounters - that is, we chance upon it where we presumed the presence 
of 'mere appearance’: the ‘shock of the truth’ consists in its sudden emer- 
gence in the midst of the realm of reassuring phenomena. 

The ‘unthinkable’ for Kant is such an encounter, such a paradoxical point 
at which ‘appearance’ itself without knowing it, touches the truth: what is at 
stake in Kant’s ‘obsessional’ economy is precisely the avoidance of the traumatic 
encounter of the Truth. That is to say, his ‘transcendental’ procedure of 
limiting our possible experience to the world of phenomena and ofexduding 
from it the ‘Thing-in-itself apparently expresses an aspiration to truth - the 
fear of falling into error by illegitimately taking phenomena for the Thing- 
in-itself However, as Hegel puts it, this fear of error, of a confusion between 
phenomena and the Thing-in-itself conceals its opposite, the fear of Truth - 
it announces a desire to elude, at any price, an encounter with the Truth: 

if the fear of falling into error sets up a mistrust of Science, which in 
the absence of such scruples gets on with the work itself and actually 
cognizes something, it is hard to see why we should not turn round 
and mistrust this very mistrust. Should we not be concerned as to 
whether this fear of error is not just the error itself ? 20 

The relation between appearance and Truth should thus be conceived in 
a dialectically reflexive way: the most radical illusion consists not in accept- 
ing as Truth, as the ‘Thing-in-itself, what is effectively a mere deceptive 
illusion, but rather in a refusal to recognize the presence of the Truth - 
in pretending that we are still dealing with a fictitious appearance, when 
Truth is already here. 


20 Hegel, Phenomenology of Spirit, p. 47. 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL! 217 


Sydney Pollack’s film Three Days of the Condor exemplifies perfectly this 
paradoxical, self-reflexive character of the illusion. A small branch of the 
CIA is occupied with reading all espionage and detective novels in search 
of ideas which could perhaps be applied in real espionage work. Suddenly, 
a special unit of liquidators kills all the members of this branch - why? 
Because one of them has noted in some obscure novel, and passed over to 
his superiors, the idea of a secret ‘organization-within-an-organization’ 
whose existence should be unknown and which controls the legal organ- 
ization; however, such an organization already exists within the CIA. In 
other words, he proposed a fiction without knowing that he had touched 
the truth. We can now see what Lacan is aiming at when he says that ‘the 
Truth has the structure of a fiction’. This is clear from the Lacanian matrix 
of the four discourses: ‘Truth’ is an empty place, and the ‘effect of Truth’ 
is produced when, quite by chance, some piece of ‘fiction’ (of symbolically 
structured knowledge) finds itself occupying this place, as in Pollack’s 
movie when some unfortunate lower clerk unwittingly produced an 
explosive ‘effect ofTruth’. 

The fear of error which conceals its opposite, the fear of Truth: this 
Hegelian formula encapsulates perfectly the subjective position of the 
obsessional neurotic: the incessant procrastination, the endless 
precautions, which characterize his approach. At the same time this 
reference to obsessional neurosis (not as a clinical entity, of course, but 
as a subjective position, as what Hegel would call ‘the position o f thought 
towards objectivity’) enables us to locate properly the Lacanian obser- 
vation that Hegel is ‘the most sublime of all hysterics’. By determining 
thepassage from Kant to Hegel as the hystericization ofthe obsessional’s 
position, we are already in the midst of the properly Hegelian relation 
between genus and its species: hysteria and obsessional neurosis are not 
two species of neurosis as a neutral-universal genus; their relation is a 
dialectical one - it was Freud himself who noted that obsessional neurosis 
is a kind of 'dialect of hysteria’: hysteria as a fundamental determination 
ofa neurotic position contains two species, obsessional neurosis and itself 
as its own species. 



218 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


There is, of course, a whole set of differential features enabling us to 
construct the relation of hysteria to obsessional neurosis as a symmetrical 
opposition: 

• The hysterical symptom articulates, stages, a repressed desire, whereas 
the obsessional symptom stages the punishment for realizing this 
desire. 

• A hysterical neurotic cannot bear waiting; he hastens through, he over- 
takes himself and misses the object of desire precisely because of this 
impatience - because he wants to get at it too quickly - whereas the 
obsessional neurotic builds up a whole system enabling him to postpone 
the encounter of the object ad infinitum: the moment is never right. 

• To a hysterical neurotic, the object procures too little enjoyment: 
apropos of every object, his experience is how ‘this is not that’, which 
is why he hastens to reach, finally, the right object; whereas the 
obsessional neurotic’s problem is that the object offers him too much 
enjoyment; the immediate encounter with the object would be 
unbearable because of its excessive fullness, which is why he post- 
pones the encounter. 

• When the hysterical neurotic feels that he ‘doesn’t know what he really 
wants’, he addresses the question concerning his desire to the other - 
to the one who embodies for him the ‘subject presumed to know’ - 
whereas the obsessional neurotic is tortured by doubt; he cannot decide 
- that is to say, he addresses his question to himself-, and so on. 

However, a closer look quickly reveals how this impression of a symmetrical 
opposition is false: one of the opposite poles (hysterical) is always ‘unmarked’ 
- that is, it functions at the same time as a neutral, universal medium of 
the opposition; while the other (obsessional) is ‘marked’ and introduces a 
specific difference. It is thus not difficult to demonstrate how the obsessional 
staging of the punishment for the realization of a desire is nothing but an 
inverse, ‘mediated’ way of staging the realization of desire; how the 
obsessional question the subject addresses to himself (the famous ‘obsessional 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL! 219 


doubt’) is nothing but a masked form of the -demand addressed to the other; 
how the obsessional postponement of the encounter with the object out of 
fear that we would not be able to bear such excessive enjoyment is nothing 
but a refined way ofavoiding disappointment with the object - that is, how 
it conceals a foreboding that the object itself 'is not that’. 

And, to return to the passage from Kant to Hegel, the same goes for the 
Kantian postponement of the encounter with the Thing - for the Kantian 
gap dividing for ever the Thing from the world of phenomena: it conceals 
a foreboding that perhaps this Thing is itself nothing but a lack, an empty 
place; that beyond the phenomenal appearance there is only a certain 
negative self-relationship because of which the positively given phenom- 
enal world is perceived as ‘mere appearance’ - in other words, that 


'The supersensible is therefore appearance qua appearance ' 

In the chapter in Phenomenology on ‘Force and Understanding’ - the chapter 
which accomplishes the passage from consciousness to self-consciousness 
- Hegel proposes this formula, which blows up the whole Kantian obses- 
sional economy: ‘The supersensible is the sensuous and the perceived 
posited as it is in truth, but the truth of the sensuous and the perceived is 
to be appearance. The supersensible is therefore appearance qua appearance! 1 ' 
The appearance implies that there is something behind it which appears 
through it; it conceals a truth and by the same gesture gives a foreboding 
thereof, it simultaneously hides and reveals the essence behind its curtain. 
But what is hidden behind the phenomenal appearance? Precisely the fact 
that there is nothing to hide. What is concealed is that the very act of 
concealing conceals nothing. 

But is the supersensible therefore a pure illusion of the consciousness, 
a simple trompe I'ceill Is it ‘we’ who can see that there is nothing behind 
the curtain, while the ‘naive’ consciousness is caught in the web of 


21 Ibid., p. 89. 



220 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 

deception? With Hegel, we should never immediately oppose the state of 
things as 'we’ see it ‘correctly’ and the viewpoint ofthe erroneous conscious- 
ness: if there is deception we cannot subtract it from the Thing; it consti- 
tutes its very heart. If, behind the phenomenal veil, there is nothing, it is 
through the mediation of this ‘nothing’ that the subject constitutes 
himself in the very act of his misrecognition. The illusion that there is 
something hidden behind the curtain is thus a reflexive one: what is 
hidden behind the appearance is the possibility of this very illusion - 
behind the curtain is the fact that the subject thinks something must be 
behind it. The illusion, albeit ‘false’, is effectively located in the empty 
place behind the curtain - the illusion has opened a place where it is 
possible, an empty space that it fills out - where the ‘illusory reality’, redu- 
plicating the external, factual reality, could find its proper place: 

... in order that there may yet be something the void - which, though 
it first came about as devoid of objective Things must, however, as empty 
in itself, be taken as also void of all spiritual relationships and distinc- 
tions of consciousness qua consciousness - in order, then, that in this 
complete void, which is even called the holy of holies, there may yet be 
something, we must fill it up with reveries, appearances, produced by 
consciousness itself It would have to be content with being treated so 
badly for it would not deserve anything better, since even reveries are 
better than its own emptiness.” 

The supersensible Holy is thus first an empty place, a space devoid of all 
positive content, and only subsequently is this emptiness filled out with 
some content (taken, of course, from the very sensuous world that the 
supersensible is supposed to negate, to have left behind]. The respective 
contents of the supersensible and of the sensuous world are the same; an 
object becomes ‘holy’ simply by changing places - by occupying, filling 
out, the empty place of the Holy. 


22 Ibid, pp. 88 9. 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL? 221 


This is also the fundamental feature of the logic of the Lacanian object: 
the place logically precedes objects which occupy it: what the objects, in their 
given positivity, are masking is not some other, more substantial order of 
objects but simply the emptiness, the void they are filling out. We must 
remember that there is nothing intrinsically sublime in a sublime object 
according to Lacan, a sublime object is an ordinary, everyday object 
which, quite by chance, finds itself occupying the place of what he calls 
das Ding, the impossible-real object of desire. The sublime object is ‘an 
object elevated to the level of das Ding’. It is its structural place - the fact 
that it occupies the sacred/forbidden place of jouissance - and not its 
intrinsic qualities that confers on it its sublimity. 

This point is best illustrated by a whole series of Bunuel’s films which 
are built around the same central motif of the - to use Bunuel’s own words 
- ‘non-explainable impossibility of the fulfilment of a simple desire’. In L ’Age 
d’orthe couple want to consummate their love, but they are again and again 
prevented by some stupid accident; in The Criminal Life of Archibaldo de la Cruz 
the hero wants to accomplish a simple murder, but all his attempts fail; in 
The Exterminating Angel, after a party, a group of rich people cannot cross the 
threshold and leave the house; in The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie two 
couples want to dine together, but unexpected complications always prevent 
the accomplishment of this simple wish; and finally, in That Obscure Object 
of Desire, we have the paradox of a woman who, through a series of tricks, 
postpones again and again the final moment of reunion with her old lover. 

What is the common feature of these films? An ordinary, everyday act 
becomes impossible to accomplish as soon as it finds itself occupying the 
impossible place of das Ding and begins to embody the sublime object of 
desire. This object or act may be in itself extremely banal (a common 
dinner, passing the threshold after a party). It has only to occupy the 
sacred/forbidden, empty place in the Other, and a whole series of impass- 
able obstacles will build up around it; the object or act, in its very vulgarity, 
cannot be reached or accomplished. 

What the object is masking, dissimulating, by its massive, fascinating 
presence, is not some other positivity but its own place, the void, the lack 



222 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


that it is filling in by its presence - the lack in the Other. And what Lacan 
calls ‘going-through the fantasy’ consists precisely in the experience of 
such an inversion apropos of the fantasy-object: the subject must undergo 
the experience of how the ever-lacking object-cause of desire is in itself 
nothing but an objectivication, an embodiment of a certain lack; of how 
its fascinating presence is here just to mask the emptiness of the place it 
occupies, the emptiness which is exactly the lack in the Other - which 
makes the big Other (the symbolic order) perforated, inconsistent. 

So ‘we’ (who have already ‘gone through the fantasy’) can see that 
there is nothing where the consciousness thought that it saw something, 
but our knowledge is already mediated by this ‘illusion’ in so far as it 
aims at the empty space which makes the illusion possible. In other words, 
if we subtract from the illusion the illusion itself (its positive content) 
what remains is not simply nothing but a determinate nothing, the void 
in the structure which opened the space for the ‘illusion’. To ‘unmask 
the illusion’ does not mean that ‘there is nothing to see behind if: what 
we must be able to see is precisely this nothing as such - beyond the 
phenomena, there is nothing but this nothing itself, ‘nothing’ which is the 
subject. To conceive the appearance as ‘mere appearance’ the subject 
effectively has to go beyond it, to ‘pass over’ it, but what he finds there 
is his own act of passage. 

Usually, these Hegelian propositions are reduced to a simple onto- 
logical elevation of the subject to the status of the substantial Essence of 
the totality of being: first, the consciousness thinks there is hidden, behind 
the phenomenal veil, another transcendent Essence; then, with the passage 
from consciousness to self-consciousness, it experiences how this Essence 
behind the phenomena, this force which animates them, is the subject 
himself However, such a reading, which immediately identifies the subject 
with the Essence hidden behind the curtain, misses the crucial fact that 
the Hegelian passage from consciousness to self-consciousness implies the 
experience of a certain radical failure, the subject (consciousness) wants to 
penetrate the secret behind the curtain; his effort fails because there is 
nothing behind the curtain, nothing which 'is' the subject. It is in this precise 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL! 223 


sense that, with Lacan too, the subject (of the signifier] and the [fantasy] 
object ate correlative or even identical: the subject is the void, the hole in 
theOther,and the object the inert content filling up this void; the subject’s 
entire ‘being’ thus consists in the fantasy-object filling out his void. This 
is why these Hegelian formulas recall, point by point, the tale evoked by 
Lacan in his Seminar XI: 

In the classical tale of Zeuxis and Parrhasios, Zeuxis has the advantage 
of having made grapes that attracted the birds. The stress is placed not 
on the fact that these grapes were in any way perfect grapes, but on 
the fact that even the eye of the bird was taken in by them. This is 
proved by the fact that his friend Parrhasios triumphs over him by 
having painted on the wall a veil, a veil so lifelike that Zeuxis, turning 
towards him, said, Well, and now show us whatyou have painted behind it. 
By this he showed that what was at issue was certainly deceiving the 
eye [ tromper l'ceil\. A triumph of the gaze over the eyed’ 

We can deceive animals by an appearance imitating a reality for which it 
can be a substitute, but the properly human way to deceive a man is to 
imitate the dissimulation of reality - the act of concealing deceives us precisely 
by pretending to conceal something. In other words, there is nothing behind 
the curtain except the subject who has already gone beyond it: 

It is manifest that behind the so-called curtain which is supposed to 
conceal the inner world, there is nothing to be seen unless we go behind 
it ourselves as much in order that we may see, as that there may be 
something behind there which can be seen . 24 

This is how we should read the fundamental Hegelian distinction between 
substance and subject: the substance is the positive, transcendent Essence 

23 Lacan, The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psycho Analysis, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 

197S, p. 103. 

24 Hegel, Phenomenology of Spirit, p. 103. 



224 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


supposed to be hidden behind the curtain of phenomena; to ‘experience 
the substance as subject’ means to grasp that the curtain of phenomena 
conceals above all the fact that there is nothing to conceal, and this 
‘nothing’ behind the curtain is the subject. In other words, at the level 
of the substance the appearance is simply deceiving, it offers us a false 
image of the Essence; whereas at the level of the subject the appearance 
deceives precisely by pretending to deceive - by feigning that there is 
something to be concealed. It conceals the fact that there is nothing to 
conceal: it does not feign to tell the truth when it is lying, it feigns to 
lie when it is actually telling the truth - that is, it deceives by pretending 
to deceive. 

A phenomenon can thus tell the truth precisely by presenting itself as 
a lie, like the Jew in the Freudian joke often quoted by Lacan, who 
reproaches his friend: ‘Why are you telling me that you are going to Cracow 
and not to Lemberg, when you’re really going to Cracow?’ (telling the 
truth represented a breach of the implicit code of deception which ruled 
their relationship: when one of them was going to Cracow, he was supposed 
to tell the lie that his destination was Lemberg, and vice versaj. In his 
commentary on the tale of Zeuxis and Parrhasios, Lacan refers to Plato’s 
protest against the illusion of painting: 

It is here that this little story becomes useful in showing us why Plato 
protests against the illusion of painting. The point is not that painting 
gives an illusory equivalance to the object, even if Plato seems to be 
saying this. The point is that the trompe I’oeil of painting pretends to 
be something other than what it is . . . The picture does not compete 
with appearance, it competes with what Plato designates for us beyond 
appearance as being the Idea. It is because the picture is the appearance 
that says it is that which gives the appearance that Plato attacks 
painting, as if it were an activity competing with his own . 25 


25 Lacan, The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psycho Analysis, p. 112. 



WHICH SUBJECT OF THE REAL? 225 


The real danger, for Plato, is this appearance which purports to be an 
appearance and for this reason is nothing but the Idea itself, as Hegel 
knows very well (‘the supersensible [Idea] is the appearance qua appear- 
ance’]. This is the secret philosophy has to conceal to retain its consistency 

- the secret that Hegel, at the culminating point of the metaphysical 
tradition, makes us see. This is why the fundamental Hegelian motif that 
‘appearance as such is essential’ could not be grasped without the hypoth- 
esisofthebigOther -of the autonomous symbolic order rendering possible 
the deception in its properly human dimension. 

To exemplify this connection let us refer to Stalinism - more specifically, 
to its obsessive insistence that whatever the cost we must maintain the 
appearance: we all know that behind the scenes there are wild factional 
struggles going on; neverthless we must keep at any price the appearance 
of Party unity; nobody really believes in the ruling ideology, every indi- 
vidual preserves a cynical distance from it and everybody knows that 
nobody believes in it; but still, the appearance is to be maintained at any 
price that people are enthusiastically building socialism, supporting the 
Party, and so on. 

This appearance is essential: if it were to be destroyed - if somebody 
were publicly to pronounce the obvious truth that ‘the emperor is naked’ 
(that nobody takes the ruling ideology seriously . . . ] - in a sense the whole 
system would fall apart: why? In other words: if everybody knows that 
‘the emperor is naked’ and if everybody knows that all the others know 
it, what is the agency for the sake of which the appearance is to be kept 
at any price? There is, of course, only one consistent answer: the big Other 

- it is the big Other which should be maintained in ignorance. This also 
opens up a new approach to the status of deception in ideology: those who 
should be deceived by the ideological ‘illusion’ are not primarily concrete 
individuals but, rather, the big Other; we could thus say that Stalinism 
has a value as the ontological proof of the existence of the big Other. 

On the other hand, not until the emergence ofYugoslav self-management 
did Stalinism effectively reach the level of deception in its strictly human 
dimension. In Stalinism, the deception is basically still a simple one: the 



226 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


power (Party-and-State bureaucracy] feigns to rule in the name of the 
people while everybody knows that it rules in its own interest - in the 
interest of reproducing its own power; in Yugoslav self-management, 
however, the same party-and-State bureaucracy reigns, but it reigns in 
the name of an ideology whose basic thesis is that the greatest obstacle 
to the full development of self-management consists in the ‘alienated’ 
Party-and-State bureaucracy. 

The elementary semantic axis which legitimizes Party rule is the oppo- 
sition between self-managing socialism and ‘bureaucratic’ State-and-Party 
socialism - in other words, the Party-and-State bureaucracy legitimizes 
its rule by an ideology which designates itself as the principal enemy, so 
that an ordinary Yugoslav subject could address to the ruling bureaucracy 
the same question as was addressed by one Jew to another in the joke 
recounted earlier. ‘Why are you telling me that the greatest enemy of 
workers’ self-management is the Party-and-State bureaucracy, when the 
greatest enemy is really the Party-and-State bureaucracy?’ 

We can see now why the thesis by which, in contrast to habitual ‘real 
socialism’, Yugoslav self-management represents ‘socialism with a human 
face’, is not a mere propaganda ploy but is to be taken quite literally: in 
Yugoslavia people are, of course, deceived, just as in all ‘real socialism’, 
but they are at least deceived on a specifically human level. After what we 
have said about the Hegelian distinction between substance and subject, 
we should not be surprised to find that the difference between habitual 
‘real socialism’ and Yugoslav self-management coincides with this 
distinction. There is a well-known Yugoslav political joke expressing the 
quintessence of this: ‘In Stalinism, the representatives of the people drive 
Mercedes, while in Yugoslavia, the people themselves drive Mercedes by 
proxy, through their representatives.' That is to say, Yugoslav self- 
management is the point at which the subject must recognize, in the 
figure embodying the ‘alienated’ substantial power (the bureaucrat driving 
the Mercedes), not only a foreign force opposed to him - that is, his other 
- but himself in his otherness, and thus ‘reconcile’ himself with it. 



6 ‘Not Only as Substance, 
but Also as Subject ’ 


The logic of sublimity 

In his essay on ‘The Religion of Sublimity’, Yirmiyahu Yovel has pointed 
out a certain inconsistency in Hegel’s systematization of religions, an 
inconsistency which does not result directly from the very principle of 
Hegel’s philosophy but expresses rather a contingent, empirical prejudice 
of Hegel’s as an individual, and can therefore be rectified by consequent 
use of Hegel’s own dialectical procedure . 1 This inconsistency concerns the 
place occupied respectively by Jewish and by ancient Greek religion: in 
Hegel’s Lessons on the Philosophy of Religion, Christianity is immediately 
preceded by three forms of the 'religion of spiritual individuality’: the 
Jewish religion of Sublimity [ Erhabenheit] , the Greek religion of Beauty, 
and the Roman religion of Understanding \Verstand\. In this succession 
the first, lowest place is taken by the Jewish religion - that is, Greek religion 
is conceived as a higher stage in spiritual development than the Jewish 
religion. According to Yovel, Hegel has here given way to his personal 
anti-Semitic prejudice, because to be consistent with the logic of the 
dialectical process it is undoubtedly the Jewish religion which should 
follow the Greek. 


i Yirmiyahu Yovel, 'La Religion de la sublimite’, in Hegel er la religion, ed. G. 
Planty Bon jour, Paris: PUF, 1982. 



228 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


Despite some reservations about the detail ofY ovel’s arguments, his 
fundamental point seems to hit the mark: the Greek, Jewish and Christian 
religions do form a kind of triad which corresponds perfectly to the triad of 
reflection (positing, external and determinate reflection), to this elementary 
matrix of the dialectical process. Greek religion embodies the moment of 
‘positing reflection’: in it, the plurality of spiritual individuals (gods) is imme- 
diately ‘posited’ as the given spiritual essence of the world. The Jewish religion 
introduces the moment of ‘external reflection’ - all positivity is abolished by 
reference © the unapproachable, transcendent God, the absolute Master, the 
One of absolute negativity, while Christianity conceives the individuality of 
man not as something external to God but as a ‘reflective determination’ of 
God himself (in the figure of Christ, God himself ‘becomes man’). 

It is something of a mystery why Yovel does not mention the crucial 
argument in his favour: the very interconnection of the notions of ‘Beauty’ 
and ‘Sublimity’. If Greek religion is, according to Hegel, the religion of 
Beauty and Jewish religion that of Sublimity, it is clear that the very logic 
of the dialectical process compels us to conclude that Sublimity should 
folio iv Beauty because it is the point of its breakdown, of its mediation, of 
its self-referential negativity. In using the couple Beauty/Sublimity Hegel 
relies, of course, on Kant’s Critique of Judgement, where Beauty and Sublimity 
are opposed along the semantic axes quality-quantity, shaped-shapeless, 
bounded-boundless: Beauty calms and comforts; Sublimity excites and 
agitates. ‘Beauty’ is the sentiment provoked when the suprasensible Idea 
appears in the material, sensuous medium, in its harmonious formation 
- a sentiment of immediate harmony between Idea and the sensuous 
material of its expression; while the sentiment of Sublimity is attached © 
chaotic, terrifying limitless phenomena (rough sea, rocky mountains). 

Above all, however, Beauty and Sublimity are opposed along the axis 
pleasure-displeasure: a view of Beauty offers us pleasure, while ‘the object 
is received as sublime with a pleasure that is only possible through the 
mediation of displeasure’. 2 In short, the Sublime is ‘beyond the pleasure 


2 Immanuel Kant, Critique of Judgement, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1964, p. 109. 



'NOT ONLY AS SUBSTANCE’ 229 


principle’, it is a paradoxical pleasure procured by displeasure itself (the 
exact definition - one of the Lacanian definitions - of enjoyment [j'ouissance}). 
This means at the same time that the relation of Beauty to Sublimity coin- 
cides with the relation of immediacy to mediation - further proof that 
the Sublime must follow Beauty as a form of mediation of its immediacy. 
On closer examination, in what does this mediation proper to the Sublime 
consist? Let us quote the Kantian definition of the Sublime: 

The Sublime may be described in this way: It is an object (of nature) 
the representation [Vorstellung] of which determines the mind to regard 
the elevation of nature beyond our reach as equivalent to a presentation 
[Darstellung] of ideas’ 

It is a definition which, so to speak, anticipates Lacan’s determination of the 
sublime object in his seminar on The Ethic of Psychoanalysis, ‘an object raised 
to the level of the (impossible-real) Thing’. That is to say, with Kant the 
Sublime designates the relation of an inner-worldly, empirical, sensuous 
object to Ding an sich to the transcendent, trans-phenomenal, unattainable 
Thing-in-itself The paradox of the Sublime is as follows: in principle, the 
gap separating phenomenal, empirical objects of experience from the 
Thing-in-itself is insurmountable - that is, no empirical object, no 
representation [ Vorstellung ] ofit can adequately present [darstellen] the Thing 
(the suprasensible Idea); but the Sublime is an object in which we can 
experience this very impossibility, this permanent failure of the 
representation to reach after the Thing. Thus, by means of the very failure 
of representation, we can have a presentiment of the true dimension of the 
Thing. This is also why an object evoking in us the feeling of Sublimity gives 
us simultaneous pleasure and displeasure: it gives us displeasure because of 
its inadequacy to the Thing-Idea, but precisely through this inadequacy it 
gives us pleasure by indicating the true, incomparable greatness of the Thing, 
surpassing every possible phenomenal, empirical experience: 


3 Ibid., p. 119. 



230 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


The feeling of the Sublime is, therefore, at once a feeling of dis- 
pleasure, arising from the inadequacy of imagination in the aesthetic 
estimation of magnitude to attain, to its estimation by reason, and 
a simultaneously awakened pleasure, arising from this very judge- 
ment of the inadequacy of the greatest faculty of sense being in 
accord with ideas of reason, so far as the effort to attain to these is 
for us a law . 4 

We can now see why it is precisely nature in its most chaotic, boundless, 
terrifying dimension which is best qualified to awaken in us the feeling 
of the Sublime: here, where the aesthetic imagination is strained to its 
utmost, where all finite determinations dissolve themselves, the failure 
appears at its purest. 

The Sublime is therefore the paradox of an object which, in the very 
field of representation, provides a view, in a negative way, of the dimen- 
sion of what is unrepresentable. It is a unique point in Kant’s system, 
a point at which the fissure, the gap between phenomenon and Thing- 
in-itself, is abolished in a negative way, because in it the phenomenon’s 
very inability to represent the Thing adequately is inscribed in the phenom- 
enon itself - or, as Kant puts it, ‘even if the Ideas of reason can be in no 
way adequately represented [in the sensuous-phenomenal world], they 
can be revived and evoked in the mind by means of this very inadequacy 
which can be presented in a sensuous way.’ It is this mediation of the 
inability - this successful presentation by means of failure, of the inad- 
equacy itself - which distinguishes enthusiasm evoked by the Sublime 
from fanciful fanaticism [ Schwarmerei ]: fanaticism is an insane visionary 
delusion that we can immediately see or grasp what lies beyond all 
bounds of sensibility, while enthusiasm precludes all positive presen- 
tation. Enthusiasm is an example of purely negative presentation - that 
is, the sublime object evokes pleasure in a purely negative way: the place 
of the Thing is indicated through the very failure of its representation. 


4 Ibid., p. 106. 



‘NOT ONLY AS SUBSTANCE’ 


231 


Kant himself pointed out the connection between such a notion of 
Sublimity and the Jewish religion: 

We have no reason to fear that the feeling of the Sublime will suffer 
from an abstract mode of presentation like this, which is altogether 
negative as to what is sensuous. For though the imagination, no doubt, 
finds nothing beyond the sensible World to which it can lay hold, still 
this thrusting aside of the sensible barriers gives it a feeling of being 
unbounded; and that removal is thus a presentation of the infinite. As 
such it can never be anything more than a negative presentation - but 
still it expands the soul. Perhaps there is no more sublime passage in 
the Jewish Law than the commandment: Thou shalt not make unto 
thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven 
or on earth, or under the earth, and so forth. This commandment can 
alone explain the enthusiasm which the Jewish people, in their moral 
period, felt for their religion when comparing themselves with others. 5 

In what consists, then, the Hegelian criticism of this Kantian notion of 
the Sublime? From Kant’s point of view, Hegel’s dialectics appears, of 
course, as a repeated fall, as a return to the Schwannerei o ( traditional meta- 
physics which fails to take into account the abyss separating phenomena 
from the Idea and pretends to mediate the Idea with phenomena (as with 
the Jewish religion, to which Christianity appears as a return to pagan 
polytheism and the incarnation ofGod in a multitude of man-like figures). 

In Hegel’s defence, it is not enough to point out how in his dialectics none 
ofthe determinate, particular phenomena represents adequately the suprasen- 
sible Idea - that is, how the Idea is the very movement of sublation [Aufhebuiy] 
- the famous Fltissigwerden, ‘liquidizing’ - of all particular determinations. 
The Hegelian criticism is much more radical: it does not affirm, in opposition 
to Kant, the possibility of some kind of ‘reconciliation’-mediation between 
Idea and phenomena, the possibility of surmounting the gap which separates them, of abolishing the radical ‘otherness’, the radical negative relationship 
of the Idea-Thing to phenomena. Hegel’s reproach to Kant (and at the 
same time to the Jewish religion) is, on the contrary, that it is Kant himself 
who still remaim a prisoner of the field of representation. Precisely when we 
determine the Thing as a transcendent surplus beyond what can be repre- 
sented, we determine it on the basis of the field of representation, starting 
from it, within its horizon, as its negative limit: the (Jewish) notion of 
God as radical Otherness, as unrepresentable, still remains the extreme 
point of the logic of representation. 

But here again, this Hegelian approach can give way to misunderstand- 
ing if we read it as an assertion that - in opposition to Kant, who tries to 
reach the Thing through the very breakdown of the field of phenomena, 
by driving the logic of representation to its utmost - in dialectical spec- 
ulation, we must grasp the Thing ‘in itself, from itself, as it is in its pure 
Beyond, without even a negative reference or relationship to the field of 
representation. This is not Hegel’s position: the Kantian criticism has here 
done its job and if this were Hegel’s position, Hegelian dialectics would 
effectively entail a regression into the traditional metaphysics aiming at 
an immediate approach to the Thing. Hegel’s position is in fact ‘more 
Kantian than Kant himself - it adds nothing to the Kantian notion of the 
Sublime; it merely takes it more literally than Kant himself 

Hegel, of course, retains the basic dialectical moment of the Sublime, 
the notion that the Idea is reached through purely negative presentation 
- that the very inadequacy of the phenomenality to the Thing is the only 
appropriate way to present it. The real problem lies elsewhere: Kant still 
presupposes that the Thing-in-itself exists as something positively given 
beyond the field of representation, of phenomenality, the breakdown of 
phenomenality, the experience of phenomena, is for him only an ‘external 
reflection’, only a way ofindicating, within the domain of phenomenality, 
this transcendent dimension of the Thing which persists in itself beyond 
phenomenality. 

Hegel’s position is, in contrast, that there is nothing beyond phenom- 
enality, beyond the field of representation. The experience of radical 



'NOT ONLY AS SUBSTANCE' 


233 


negativity, of the radical inadequacy of all phenomena to the Idea, the 
experience of the radical fissure between the two - this experience is already 
idea itself as ‘pure’, radical negativity. Where Kant thinks that he is s till dealing 
only with a negative presentation of the Thing, we are already in the 
midst of the Thing-in-itself - for this Thing-in-itself is nothing but this 
radical negativity. In other words - in a somewhat overused Hegelian 
speculative twist - the negative experience of theThing must change into 
the experience of the Thing-in-itself as radical negativity. The experience 
of the Sublime thus remains the same: all we have to do is to subtract its 
transcendent presupposition - the presupposition that this experience 
indicates, in a negative way, some transcendentThing-in-itself persisting 
in its positivity beyond it. In short, we must limit ourselves to what is 
strictly immanent to this experience, to pure negativity, to the negative 
self-relationship of the representation. 

Homologous to Hegel’s determination of the difference between the 
death of the pagan god and the death of Christ (the first being merely 
the death of the terrestrial embodiment, of the terrestrial representation, 
figure, of God, while with the death of Christ it is God of beyond, God 
as a positive, transcendent, unattainable entity, which dies) we could 
say that what Kant fails to take into account is the way the experience 
of the nullity, of the inadequacy of the phenomenal world of 
representation, which befalls us in the sentiment of the Sublime, means 
at the same time the nullity, the non-existence of the transcendent 
Thing-in-itself as a positive entity. 

That is to say, the limit of the logic of representation is not to ‘reduce 
all contents to representations’, to what can be represented, but, on the 
contrary, in the very presupposition of some positive entity (Thing-in- 
itself) beyond phenomenal representation. We overcome phenomenality not 
by reaching beyond it, but by the experience of how there is nothing 
beyond it - how its beyond is precisely this Nothing of absolute negativity, 
of the utmost inadequacy of the appearance to its notion. The suprasensible 
essence is the ‘appearance qua appearance’ - that is, it is not enough to 
say that the appearance is never adequate to its essence, we must also add 



234 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


that this ‘essence’ itself is nothing but the inadequacy of the appearance to itself 
to its notion (inadequacy which makes it ‘[just] an appearance’]. 

Thus the status of the sublime object is displaced almost impercep- 
tibly, but none the less decisively: the Sublime is no longer an (empirical] 
object indicating through its very inadequacy the dimension of a tran- 
scendent Thing-in-itself (Idea] but an object which occupies the place, 
replaces, fills out the empty place of the Thing as the void, as the pure 
Nothing of absolute negativity - the Sublime is an object whose positive 
body is just an embodiment of Nothing. This logic of an object which, 
by its very inadequacy, ‘gives body’ to the absolute negativity of the Idea, 
is articulated in Hegel in the form of the so-called ‘infinite judgement’, 
a judgement in which subject and predicate are radically incompatible, 
incomparable: ‘the Spirit is a bone’, Wealth is the Self, ‘the State is Monarch’, 
‘God is Christ’. 

In Kant, the feeling of the Sublime is evoked by some boundless, terrifying 
imposing phenomenon (raging nature, and so on], while in Hegel we are 
dealing with a miserable Tittle piece of the Real’ - the Spirit trthe inert, dead 
skull; the subject’s Self is this small piece of metal that I am holding in my 
hand; the State as the rational organization of social life is the idiotic body 
of the Monarch; God who created the world is Jesus, this miserable 
individual crucified together with two robbers . . . Herein lies the 'last secret’ 
of dialectical speculation: not in the dialectical mediation-sublimation of all 
contingent, empirical reality, not in the deduction of all reality from the 
mediating movement of absolute negativity, but in the fact that this very 
negativity, to attain its ‘being-for-itself , must embody itself again in some 
miserable, radically contingent corporeal leftover. 


'The Spirit is a bone' 

At the immediate level, that of ‘understanding’, of ‘representation 
[Vorstellung] , this proposition appears, of course, as an extreme variation 
of vulgar materialism; reducing the spirit, the subject, pure negativity, 
the most mobile and subtle element, an ever-escaping ‘fox’, to a rigid, 



‘NOT ONLY AS SUBSTANCE’ 235 


fixed, dead object, to total inertia, to an absolutely non-dialectical presence. 
Consequently, we react to it like the shocked Soviet bureaucrat in the 
Rabinovitch joke: we are startled, it is absurd and nonsensical; the 
proposition 'the Spirit is a bone’ provokes in us a sentiment of radical, 
unbearable contradiction; it offers an image of grotesque discord, of an 
extremely negative relationship. 

However, as in the case of Rabinovitch, it is precisely thus that we 
produce its speculative truth, because this negativity, this unbearable discord, 
coincides with subjectivity itself, it is the only way to make present and ‘palpable’ 
theutmost- that is, self-referential - negativity which characterizes spiritual 
subjectivity. We succeed in transmitting the dimension of subjectivity by 
means of the failure itself, through the radical insufficiency, through the 
absolute maladjustment of the predicate in relation to the subject. This 
is why ‘the Spirit is a bone’ is a perfect example of what Hegel calls the 
‘speculative proposition’, a proposition whose terms are incompatible, 
without common measure. As Hegel points out in the Preface to the 
Phenomenology of Spirit, to grasp the true meaning of such a proposition 
we must go back and read it over again, because this true meaning arises 
from the very failure of the first, ‘immediate’ reading. 

Does not the proposition 'the Spirit is a bone’ - this equation of two 
absolutely incompatible terms, pure negative movement of the subject 
and the total inertia of a rigid object - offer us something like a Hegelian 
version of the Lacanian formula of fantasy: $ 0 a? To convince ourselves 
that it does, it is enough to place this proposition in its proper context: 
the passage from physiognomy to phrenology in the Phenomenology of 
Spirit. 

Physiognomy - the language of the body, the expression ofthe subject’s 
interior in his spontaneous gestures and grimaces - still belongs to the 
level of language, of signifying representation: a certain corporeal element 
(a gesture, a grimace) represents, signifies, the non-corporeal interior of 
the subject. The final result of physiognomy is its utter failure, every signi- 
fying representation ‘betrays’ the subject; it perverts, deforms what it is 
supposed to reveal; there is no ‘proper’ signifier of the subject. And the 



236 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


passage from physiognomy to phrenology functions as the change of level 
from representation to presence, in opposition to gestures and grimaces, the 
skull is not a sign expressing an interior; it represents nothing; it is - in 
its very inertia - the immediate presence of the Spirit: 

In physiognomy, Spirit is supposed to be known in its own outer aspect, 
as in a being which is the utterance of Spirit - the visible invisibility 
of its essence ... In the determination yet to be considered, however, 
the outer aspect is lastly a wholly immobile reality which is not in its 
own self a speaking sign but, separated from self-conscious movement, 
presents itself on its own account and is a mere Thing/ 

The bone, the skull, is thus an object which, by means of its presence, fills 
out the void, the impossibility of the signifying representation of the subject. 
In Lacanian terms it is the objectification of a certain lack: a Thing occupies 
the place where the signifier is lacking; the fantasy-object fills out the lack 
in the Other (the signifier’s order). The inert object of phrenology (the skull- 
bone) is nothing but a positive form of certain failure: it embodies, literally 
‘gives body’ to, the ultimate failure of the signifying representation of the 
subject. It is therefore correlative to the subject in so far as - in Lacanian 
theory - the subject is nothing but the impossibility of its own signifying 
representation - the empty place opened up in the big Other by the failure 
of this representation. We can now see how meaningless is the usual reproach 
according to which Hegelian dialectics ‘sublates’ all the inert objective left- 
over, including it in the circle ofthe dialectical mediation: the very movement 
of dialectics implies, on the contrary, that there is always a certain remnant, 
a certain leftover, escaping the circle of subjectivation, of subjective 
appropriation-mediation, and the subject is precisely correlative to this leftover. 
?0 a. The leftover which resists ‘subjectivation’ embodies the impossibility 
which ‘is’ the subject: in other words, the subject is strictly correlative to its 
own impossibility; its limit is its positive condition. 


6 Hegel, Phenomenology of Spirit, p. 195. 



‘NOT ONLY AS SUBSTANCE' 237 


The Hegelian ‘idealist wager’ consists, rather, in the conversion of this 
lack of the signifier into the signifier of the lack; from Lacanian theory we 
know that the signifier of this conversion, by means of which lack as such 
is symbolized, is the phallus. And - here we encounter the last surprise 
in the Hegelian text - at the end of the section on phrenology, Hegel 
himself evokes the phallic metaphor to designate the relationship between 
the two levels of reading the proposition ‘the Spirit is a bone’: the usual 
reading, that of ‘representation’/'understanding’, and the speculative one: 

The depth which Spirit brings forth from within - but only as far as its 
picture-thinking consciousness where it lets it remain - and the igno- 
rance of this consciousness about what it really is saying, are the same 
conjunction of the high and the low which, in the living being. Nature 
naively expresses when it combines the organ ofits highest fulfilment, 
the organ ofgeneration, with the organ of urination. The infinite judge- 
ment, qua infinite, would be the fulfilment of life that comprehends 
itself; the consciousness of the infinite judgement that remains at the 
level of picture-thinking behaves as urination . 7 

'Wealth is the Self 

When, in the Phenomenology of Spirit, we encounter a certain ‘figure of 
consciousness’, the question to ask is always: where does this figure repeat 
itself - that is, where do we find a later, richer, more ‘concrete’ figure 
which, by repeating the original one, offers us, perhaps, the key to its true 
meaning? Concerning the passage from physiognomy to phrenology, we 
do not have to look far: it is resumed in the chapter on the ‘Self- alienated 
Spirit’, in the form of a passage from 'language of flattery’ to Wealth. 

The ‘language of flattery’ is a middle term in the triad Noble-minded 
consciousness-The language offattery-Wealth. Noble-minded consciousness 
occupies the position ofextreme alienation: it posits all its contents in the 


7 Ibid., p. 210. 



238 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 

common Good embodied in theState - noble-minded consciousness serves 
the State with total and sincere devotion, attested by its acts. It does not 
speak: its language is limited to ‘counsels’ concerning the common Good. 
This Good functions here as an entirely substantial entity, whereas with 
the passage to the next stage of dialectical development it assumes the 
form of subjectivity: instead of the substantial State, we obtain the Monarch 
who is able to say TEtat, c’est moi’. This subjectivation of the State entails 
a radical change in the mode of serving it: 'The heroism of silent service 
becomes the heroism offlattery . s The medium of activity of the consciousness 
is no longer deeds, it is now language, flattery addressed to the person of 
the Monarch, who embodies the State. 

It is not difficult to detect the historical background of this passage 
the transformation of medieval feudalism, with its notions of honourable 
service, and so on, into absolute Monarchy. But here we are far from a 
simple corruption or degeneration of silent and devoted service into hypo- 
critical flattery. The paradoxical syntagm 'heroism of flattery’ is not to be 
taken as an ironic conjunction of two otherwise opposed notions; here we 
are concerned with heroism in the full sense of the word. The ‘heroism 
of flattery’ is a notion that deserves to be interpreted on the same level as 
that of 'voluntary servitude’; it announces the same theoretical deadlock: 
how can ‘flattery’, usually perceived as a non-ethical activity par excellence, 
as a renunciation of the ethical stance in pursuit of ‘pathological’ interests 
of gain and pleasure, obtain a properly ethical status, the status of an 
obligation whose fulfilment draws us ‘beyond the pleasure principle’? 

According to Hegel, the key to this enigma is the role played in it by 
language. Language is, of course, the very medium of the ‘journey of 
consciousness’ in Phenomenology, to such a point that it would be possible 
to define every stage of this journey, every 'figure of consciousness’, by a 
specific modality of language; even in its very beginning, in the ‘sense- 
certainty’, the dialectical movement is activated by the discord between 
what the consciousness 'means to say’ and what it effectively says. In this 


8 Ibid., p. 310. 



‘NOT ONLY AS SUBSTANCE' 239 


series, the ‘language of flattery’ none the less presents an exception: only 
here is language not reduced to a medium of the dialectical p rocess but 
becomes as such, in its very form, what is at stake in the struggle; it ‘has 
for its content the form itself, the form which language itself is, and is 
authoritative as language. It is the power of speech, as that which performs 
what has to be performed’. 5 

This is why ‘flattery’ is not to be conceived at the psychological level, 
in the sense ofhypocritical and avaricious adulation: what announces itself 
here is rather the dimension of an alienation proper to language as such - it 
is the very form of language which introduces a radical alienation; noble- 
minded consciousness betrays the sincerity of its internal conviction as 
soon as it starts talking. That is to say, as soon as we start talking, truth is 
on the side of the Universal, of what we are ‘effectively saying’, and the 
‘sincerity’ of our innermost feelings becomes something ‘pathological’ in 
the Kantian sense of the word: something of a radically non-ethical nature, 
something which belongs to the domain of the pleasure principle. 

The subject can pretend that his flattery is nothing but a simple feign- 
ing accommodation to an external ritual which has nothing whatsoever 
to do with his innermost and sincere convictions. The problem is that as 
soon as he pretends to feign, he is already the victim of his own feigning: 
his true place is out there, in the empty external ritual, and what he takes 
for his innermost conviction is nothing but the narcissistic vanity of his 
null subjectivity - or, in modern parlance, the ‘truth’ of what we are saying 
depends on the way our speech constitutes a social bond, on its perfor- 
mative function, not on the psychological ‘sincerity’ of our intention. The 
‘heroism of flattery’ carries this paradox to its extreme. Its message is: 
‘Although what I’m saying disavows completely my innermost convictions, 
I know that this form emptied of all sincerity is truer than my convictions, 
and in this sense I’m sincere in my eagerness to renounce my convictions’. 

This is how ‘flattering the Monarch against one’s convictions’ can 
become an ethical act: by pronouncing empty phrases which disavow our 


9 Ibid., p. 308. 



240 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


innermost convictions, we submit ourselves to a compulsive disrupting 
of our narcissistic homeostasis, we ‘externalize’ ourselves completely - we 
heroically renounce what is most precious in us, our ‘sense of honour’, 
our moral consistency, our self-respect. The flattery achieves a radical void- 
ance of our ‘personality’; what remains is the empty form of the subject 

- the subject as this empty form. 

We encounter a somewhat homologous logic in the passage from the 
revolutionary Leninist consciousness to the post-revolutionary Stalinist 
one: here as well, after the revolution, faithful service and devotion to the 
revolutionary Cause turns necessarily into a ‘heroism of flattery’ addressed 
to the Leader, to the subject presumed to embody and personify the 
revolutionary power. Here too, the properly heroic dimension of this flat- 
tery consists in the fact that in the name of our fidelity to the Cause we 
are ready to sacrifice our elementary sincerity, honesty and human decency 

- with the supplementary ‘turn of the screw’ that we are prepared to confess 
this very insincerity and to declare ourselves ‘traitors’. 

Ernesto Laclau was quite right to remark that it is language which is, in 
an unheard-of sense, a ‘Stalinist phenomenon. The Stalinist ritual, the empty 
flattery which ‘holds together’ the community, the neutral voice, totally 
freed of all ‘psychological’ remnants, which pronounces the ‘confessions’ 
in the staged political processes - they realize, in the purest form to date, 
a dimension which is probably essential to language as such. There is no 
need to revert to the pre-Socratic foundation if we want to ‘penetrate the 
origins oflanguage’; the History of the Communist Party (Bolsheviks] is more 
than sufficient. 

Where can the subject who is thus ‘emptied’ find his objective correl- 
ative? The Hegelian answer is: in Wealth, in money obtained in exchange 
for flattery. The proposition ‘Wealth is the Self repeats at this level the 
proposition ‘The Spirit is a bone’: in both cases we are dealing with a 
proposition which is at first sight absurd, nonsensical, with an equation 
the terms of which are incompatible; in both cases we encou-n ter the same 
logical structure of passage: the subject, totally lost in the medium of 
language (language of gestures and grimaces; language of flattery), finds 



'NOT ONLY AS SUBSTANCE' 


241 


his objective counterpart in the inertia of a non-language object (skull, 
money). 

The paradox, the patent nonsense of money - this inert, external, passive 
object that we can hold in our hands and manipulate - serving as the 
immediate embodiment of Self, is no more difficult to accept than the 
proposition that the skull embodies the immediate effectivity of the Spirit. 
The difference between the two propositions is determined solely by the 
difference in the starting point of the respective dialectical movements: if 
we start from language reduced to ‘gestures and grimaces of the body’, 
the objective counterpart to the subject is what at this level presents total 
inertia - the skullbone; but if we conceive language as the medium of the 
social relations of domination, its objective counterpart is ofcourse wealth 
as the embodiment, as the materialization of social power. 


Positing, external, determinate reflection 

This paradox of the ‘infinite judgement’ is what escapes Kant - why? To 
put it in Hegelian terms, because Kant’s philosophy is one of ‘external 
reflection’ - because Kant is not yet able to accomplish the passage from 
‘external’ to ‘determinate’ reflection. In Kant’s view, the whole movement 
which brings forth the feeling of the Sublime concerns only our subjective 
reflection external to the Thing, not the Thing-in-itself - that is, it 
represents only the way we, as finite subjects caught in the limits of our 
phenomenal experience, can mark in a negative mode the dimension of 
the trans-phenomenal Thing. In Hegel, however, this movement is an 
immanent reflexive determination of the Thing-in-itself - that is, the 
Thing is nothing but this reflexive movement. 

To exemplify this movement of reflection - namely the triad of positing, 
external and determinate reflection, 10 let us take the eternal hermeneutical 
question of how to read a text. ‘Positing reflection’ corresponds to a naive 


10 G. W. F. Hegel, Wissenschaft der Logik, volumes I and II, Hamburg: Hg. von G. 
Lasson, l 



242 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


reading claiming immediate access to the true meaning of the text, we 
know, we pretend to grasp immediately what a text says. The problem 
arises, of course, when there are a number of mutually exclusive readings 
claiming access to the true meaning: how do we choose between them, 
how do we judge their claims? 'External reflection’ provides a way out of 
this impasse: it transposes the ‘essence’, the ‘true meaning’ of a text into 
the unattainable beyond, making of it a transcendent ‘Thing-in-itself. All 
that is accessible to us, finite subjects, are distorted reflections, partial 
aspects deformed by our subjective perspective; the Truth-in-itself, the 
true meaning of the text, is lost for ever. 

All we have to do to pass from ‘external’ to 'determinate' reflection is 
to become aware how this very externality of the external refexive determinations 
of the ‘essence [foe. series of distorted, partial reflections of the true meaning 
of the text] is already internal to this ‘essence’ itself how the internal ‘essence’ 
is already in itself ‘decentred’, how the ‘essence’ of this essence itself consists 
in this series of external determinations. 

To make this somewhat speculative formulation clearer, let us take the 
case of conflicting interpretations of some great classical text - Antigone, 
for example. 'Positing reflection’ claims a direct approach to its true 
meaning: ‘Antigone is in fact a drama about . . .’; ‘external reflection’ offers 
us a gamut of historical interpretations conditioned by different social 
and other contexts: ‘We don’t know what Sophocles really meant, the 
immediate truth about Antigone is unattainable because of the filter of 
historical distance, all that is within our grasp is the succession of historical 
influences of the text: whut Antigonemeunt in the Renaissance, to Holderlin 
and Goethe, in the nineteenth century, to Heidegger, to Lacan . . . ’ And 
to accomplish the ‘determinate reflection’, we have only to experience how 
this problem of the ‘true’, ‘original’ meaning of Antigone - that is, the 
status of Antigone- in-itselC , independent of the string of its historical 
efficacy - is ultimately a pseudo-problem: to resume the fundamental 
principle of Gadamer’s hermeneutics, there is more truth in the later 
efficacy of a text, in the series of its subsequent readings, than in its 
supposedly ‘original’ meaning. 



'NOT ONLY AS SUBSTANCE’ 


243 


The ‘true’ meaning o{ Antigoneis not to be sought in the obscure origins 
of what ‘Sophocles really wanted to say’, it is constituted by this very series 
of subsequent readings - that is, it is constituted afterwards, through a 
certain structurally necessary delay. We achieve the ‘determinate reflection’ 
when we become aware of the fact that this delay is immanent, internal 
to the ‘Thing-in-itself : the Thing-in-itself is found initsTruth through the loss 
of its immediacy. In other words, what appears, to ‘external reflection’, as 
an impediment is in fact a positive condition of our access to Truth: the Truth 
ofa thing emerges because the thing is not accessible to us in its immediate 
self-identity. 

Yet what we have just said is insufficient inasmuch as it still leaves 
room for a certain misunderstanding: if we grasp the plurality of phenom- 
enal determinations which at first sight blocked our approach to the 
‘essence’ as so many self-determinations of this very ‘essence’ - if we trans- 
pose the fissure separating the appearance from essence into the internal 
fissure of the essence itself- it could still be said that in this way - through 
‘determinate reflection’ - the appearance is ultimately reduced to the self- 
determination of the essence, ‘sublated’ in its self-movement, internalized, 
conceived as a subordinate moment of self-mediation of the essence. We 
have yet to add the decisive emphasis: it is not only that the appearance, 
the fissure between appearance and essence, is a fissure internal to the 
essence itself; the crucial point is that, inversely, 'essence' itself is nothing but 
the self rupture, the selffissure of the appearance. 

In other words, the fissure between appearance and essence is internal 
to the appearance itself; it must be reflected in the very domain of appear- 
ance - this is what Hegel calls ‘determinate reflection’. The basic feature 
of Hegelian reflection is thus the structural, conceptual necessity of its 
redoubling, it is not only that the essence must appear, must articulate its 
inner truth in a multiplicity of determinations (this being one of the 
commonplaces of Hegelian commentary: ‘the essence is only as deep as it 
is broad’); the point is that it must appear for the appearance itself- as essence 
in its difference to appearance, in the form of a phenomenon which, 
paradoxically, gives body to the nullity of phenomena as such. This 



244 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


redoubling characterizes the movement of reflection; we run into it at all 
levels of the Spirit, from the State to religion. The world, the universe, is 
of course the manifestation of divinity, the reflection of God’s infinite 
creativity; but for God to become effective he must again reveal himself 
to his creation, embody himself in a particular person (Christ). The State 
is, of course, a rational totality; but it establishes itself as an effective 
sublation-mediation of all particular contents only by embodying itself 
again in the contingent individuality of the Monarch. This redoubling 
movement is what defines 'determinate reflection’, and the element which 
embodies again, which gives positive form to the very movement of 
sublation of all positivity, is what Hegel calls ‘reflexive determination’. 

What we must grasp is the intimate connection, even identity, between 
this logic of reflection (positing, external, determinate reflection) and the 
Hegelian notion of the ‘absolute’ subject - of the subject which is no longer 
attached to some presupposed substantial contents but posits its own 
substantial presuppositions. Roughly speaking, our thesis is that what is 
constitutive for the Hegelian subject is precisely this redoubling of the 
reflection, the gesture by means of which the subject posits the substantial 
‘essence’ presupposed in the external reflection. 


Positing the presuppositions 

To exemplify this logic of ‘positing the presuppositions’, let us take one 
of the most famous ‘figures of consciousness’ from Hegel’s Phenomenology 
of Spirit, the ‘beautiful soul’. How does Hegel undermine the position of 
the ‘beautiful soul’, of this gentle, fragile, sensitive form of subjectivity 
which, from its safe position as innocent observer, deplores the wicked 
ways of the world? The falsity of the ‘beautiful soul’ lies not in its inactivity, 
in the fact that it only complains of a depravity without doing something 
to remedy it; it consists, on the contrary, in the very mode of activity 
implied by this position of inactivity - in the way the 'beautiful soul’ 
structures the ‘objective’ social world in advance so that it is able to assume, 
to play in it the role of the fragile, innocent and passive victim. This, then, 



‘NOT ONLY AS SUBSTANCE' 245 


is Hegel’s fundamental lesson: when we are active, when we intervene in 
the world through a particular act, the real act is not this particular, e mpir- 
ical, factual intervention (or non-intervention]; the real act is of a strictly 
symbolic nature, it consists in the very mode in which we structure the 
world, our perception of it, in advance, in order to make our intervention 
possible, in order to open in it the space for our activity (or inactivity]. 
The real act thus precedes the (particular-factual) activity; it consists in the 
previous restructuring of our symbolic universe into which our (factual, 
particular) act will be inscribed. 

To make this clear, let us take the care of the suffering mother as the 
‘pillar of the family’: all other members of the family - her husband, her 
children - exploit her mercilessly; she does all the domestic work and she 
is of course continually groaning, complaining of how her life is nothing 
but mute suffering, sacrifice without reward. The point, however, is that 
this ‘silent sacrifice’ is her imaginary identification: it gives consistency 
to her self-identity - if we take this incessant sacrificing from her, nothing 
remains; she literally ‘loses ground’. 

This is a perfect case of Lacanian communication (by which the speaker 
gets back from the recipient his own message in its inverted - that is, true 
- meaning). The meaning of the mother’s incessant groaning is a demand. 
‘Keep on exploiting me! My sacrifice is all that gives meaning to my life!’, 
so that by exploiting her mercilessly, other members of the family return 
to her the true meaning of her own message. In other words, the true 
meaning of the mother’s complaint is: ‘I’m ready to give up, to sacrifice 
everything . . . eveything but the sacrifice itself !’ What the poor mother must 
do, if she wants to liberate herself effectively from this domestic ens lave- 
ment, is to sacrifice the sacrifice itself - to stop accepting or even actively 
sustaining the social network (of the family) which confers on her the role 
of exploited victim. 

The mother’s fault is therefore not simply in her ‘inactivity’ in 
silently enduring the role ofexploited victim, but in actively sustaining 
the social-symbolic network in which she is reduced to playing such a 
role. Here, we could also refer to the distinction between ‘constituting’ 



246 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


and ‘constituted’ identification - between the ideal ego and the ego- 
ideal. On the level of the ideal-imaginary ego, the ‘beautiful soul’ sees 
herself as a fragile, passive victim; she identifies with this role; in it she 
'likes herself, she appears to herself likeable; this role gives her a narcis- 
sistic pleasure; but her real identification is with the formal structure 
of the intersubjective field which enables her to assume this role. In 
other words, this structuring of the intersubjective space (the family 
network) is the point of her symbolic identification, the point from which 
she observes herself so that she appears to herself likeable in her 
imaginary role. 

We could also formulate all this in terms of the Hegelian dialectics of 
form and content, in which the Truth is of course in the form: by means 
of a purely formal act, the ‘beautiful soul’ structures its social reality in 
advance in such a way that it can assume the role of passive victim; blinded 
by the fascinating content (the beauty of the role of ‘suffering victim’), 
the subject overlooks his or her formal responsibility for the given state of 
things. To explain this notion of form, let us take a historical example: 
the debate between Sartre and the French Communists immediately after 
the Second World War (the so-called ‘existentialism debate’). The Commu- 
nists’ main reproach to Sartre was as follows: by conceiving the subject as 
pure negativity, void, emptied of all positive substantial contents, of all 
determination by some pre-given ‘essence’, Sartre rejected all bourgeois 
content. What remained, however, was the pure form of bourgeois subjec- 
tivity, so Sartre had still to accomplish the last and most difficult task: to 
reject this very form of bourgeois individualistic subjectivity and give 
himself up to the working class . . . Despite its simplicity, there is a grain 
of truth in this argument: is not the blind-spot of so-called ‘bourgeois 
libertarian radicalism’ precisely in the way its pathetic sacrificing of all 
bourgeois content affirms the form ofbourgeois subjectivity? In overlook- 
ing the fact that the real ‘source of evil’ is not the positive content but 
this form itself? This dialectic of form and content is the background for 
our understanding of the following enigmatic passage from Hegel’s 
- Phenomenology. 



‘NOT ONLY AS SUBSTANCE' 247 


Action qua actualization is thus the pure form of will - the simple 
conversion of a reality that merely is into a reality that results from 
action, the conversion of the bare mode of objective knowledge into 
that of knowing reality as something produced by consciousness . 11 

Before we intervene in reality by means of a particular act, we must 
accomplish the purelyformal act of converting reality as something which 
is objectively given into reality as ‘effectivity’, as something produced, 
‘posited’ by the subject. Here the interest of the ‘beautiful soul’ is to make 
us see this gap between the two acts (or two aspects of the same act]: on 
the level of positive content she is an inactive victim, but her inactivity 
is already located in a field of effectivity, of social reality ‘that results from 
action - in the field constituted by the ‘conversion’ of the ‘objective’ reality 
into effectivity. For the reality to appear to us as the field of our own 
activity (or inactivity], we must conceive it in advance as ‘converted’ - we 
must conceive ourselves as formally responsible-guilty for it. 

Here we finally encounter the problem of posited presuppositions: in 
his particular-empirical activity, the subject of course presupposes the 
‘world’, the objectivity on which he performs his activity, as something 
given in advance, as a positive condition of his activity; but his positive- 
empirical activity is possible only if he structures his perception of the 
world in advance in a way that opens the space for his intervention - in 
other words, only if he retroactively posits the very presuppositions of his 
activity, ofhis ‘positing’. This ‘act before act’ by means ofwhich the subject 
posits the very presuppositions ofhis activity is of a strictly formal nature; 
it is a purely formal ‘conversion’ transforming reality into something 
perceived, assumed as a result of our activity. 

The crucial moment is this previousness of the act of formal conversion 
in relation to positive-factual interventions, whereby Hegel differs radically 
from Marxian dialectics: in Marx, the (collective] subject first transforms 
the given objectivity by means of the effective-material process of 


n Hegel, Phenomenology of Spirit, p. 385 . 



248 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


production; he first gives it ‘human form’, and thereupon, reflecting the 
results of his activity, he formally perceives himself as the ‘author of its world’, 
while in Hegel the order is reversed before the subject ‘actually’ intervenes 
in the world, he must formally grasp himself as responsible for it. 

In ordinary language, the subject ‘doesn’t really do anything’, he only 
assumes the guilt-responsibility for the given state of things - that is, he 
accepts it as ‘his own work’ by a purely formal act: what was a moment ago 
perceived as substantial positivity (‘reality that merely is] is suddenly 
perceived as resulting from his own activity (' reality as something produced 
by consciousness’). ‘In the beginning’ is thus not an active intervention but 
a paradoxical act of ‘imitation’, of'pretending’: the subject pretends that the 
reality which is given to him in its positivity - which he encounters in its 
factual substantiality - is his own work. The first ‘act’ of this kind, the act 
defining the very emergence of man, is the funeral ritual; Hegel develops 
this in a formal, explicit way apropos ofPolynices’ burial in Antigone: 

This universality which the individual as such attains is pure being, death, 
it is a state which has been reached immediately, in the course of Nature, 
not the result of an action cautiously done. The duty of the member of 
a Family is on that account to add this aspect, in order that the indi- 
vidual’s ultimate being, too, shall not belong solely to Nature and 
remain something irrational, but shall be something done, and the 
right of consciousness be asserted in it . . . Blood-relationship supple- 
ments, then, the abstract natural process by adding to it the movement 
of consciousness, interrupting the work of Nature and rescuing the 
blood-relation from destruction; or better, because destruction is neces- 
sary, the passage of the blood-relation into mere being, it takes on itself 
the act of destruction . 12 

The crucial dimension of the funeral rite is indicated in the last phrase 
quoted: the passage into pure being, death, natural disintegration, is 


12 Ibid., pp. 270 1. 



'NOT ONLY AS SUBSTANCE' 249 


something that happens anyway, with inevitable natural necessity; by 
means of the funeral rite the subject takes upon himself this process of 
natural disintegration, he symbolically repeats it, he pretends that this 
process resulted from his own free decision. 

Of course, from a Heideggerian perspective we can here reproach Hegel 
with bringing subjectivism to its extreme: the subject wants to dispose 
freely even with death, this limiting condition of human existence; he 
wants to transform it into his own act. However, the Lacanian approach 
opens up the possibility of another, opposite reading: the funeral rite 
presents an act of symbolization par excellence; by means of a forced choice, 
the subject assumes, repeats as his own act, what happened anyway. In 
the funeral rite, the subject confers the form of a free act on an ‘irrational’, 
contingent natural process. 

Hegel articulates the same line of thought in a more general way in 
his Lectures on the Philosopliy of Religion, when he discusses the status of the 
Fall of man in Christianity - more specifically, the relationship between 
Evil and human nature. His starting point is of course that human nature 
is in itself innocent, in a state ‘before the Fall’ - that guilt and Evil exist 
only when we have freedom, free choice, the subject. But - and this is the 
crucial point - it would be quite erroneous to conclude, from this original 
innocence of human nature, that we can simply distinguish in man the 
part of nature - which was given to him, for which he is consequently 
not responsible - from the part of free spirit - a result of his free choice, 
the product of his activity. Human nature ‘in itself - in its abstraction 
from culture - is indeed ‘innocent’, but as soon as the form ofspirit begins 
to reign, as soon as we enter culture, man becomes, so to speak, retroactively 
responsible for his own nature, for his most ‘natural’ passions and instincts. 
‘Culture’ consists not only in transforming nature, in conferring on it 
spiritual form: human nature itself, as soon as it is put in relation to 
culture, changes into its own opposite- what was a moment ago spontaneous 
innocence becomes retroactively pure Evil. In other words, as soon as the 
universal form of the Spirit comprises natural contents, the subject is 
formally responsible for it even if it is materially something which he 



250 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


simply found-, the subject is treated as if, by means of an eternally past, 
primordial act, he freely chose his own natural-substantial base. It is this 
formal responsibility, this fissure between the spiritual form and the given 
content, which drives the subject to incessant activity.' 3 

It is thus not difficult to realize the connection between this gesture 
of ‘choosing what is given’, this act of formal conversion by means of 
which the subject assumes - determines as his own work - the given 
objectivity and the passage from external to determinate reflection 
accomplished when the posidng-producing subject posits the very 
presuppositions of his activity, of his ‘positing’: what is ‘positing of 
presuppositions’ if not that very gesture of formal conversion by means 
of which we ‘posit’ as out own work what is given to us? 

It is likewise not difficult to recognize the connection between all this 
and the fundamental Hegelian thesis that the substance is to be conceived 
as subject. If we do not want to miss the crucial point of this Hegelian 
conception of substance as subject, we have to take into account the break 
that separates the Hegelian ‘absolute’ subject from the Kantian-Fichtean, 
still ‘finite’ subject: the latter is the subject of practical activity, the ‘positing’ 
subject, the subject which actively intervenes in the world, transforming- 
mediating the given objective reality; he is consequently bound to this 
presupposed reality. In other words, the Kantian-Fichtean subject is the 
subject of the work-process, the subject of the productive relationship to 
reality. Precisely for this reason he can never entirely ‘mediate’ the given 
objectivity, he is always bound to some transcendent presupposition (Thing- 
in-itself) upon which he performs activity, even if this presupposition is 
reduced to the mere ‘instigation [Anstojf of our practical activity. 

The Hegelian subject is, however, ‘absolute’: he is no longer a ‘finite’ 
subject bound to, limited, conditioned by some given presuppositions; he 
himself posits these very presuppositions - how? Precisely through the 
act of ‘choosing what is already given’ - that is, through the symbolic act, 

13 G. W. F. Hegel, Philosophic der Religion, volumes I and II, Frankfurt: Suhrkamp 
Verlag, 1969. 



'NOT ONLY AS SUBSTANCE’ 


251 


mentioned above, of a purely formal conversion; by pretending that the 
given reality is already his work; by assuming responsibility for it. 

The current notion according to which the Hegelian subject is ‘even 
more active’ than the Fichtean subject in so far as he succeeds where the 
Fichtean subject still fails - that is, in ‘devouring’-mediating-internalizing 
the whole effectivity without any leftover - is entirely wrong: what we 
must add to the Fichtean ‘finite’ subject to arrive at the Hegelian ‘absolute’ 
subject is just some purely formal, empty gesture - in common parlance: 
an act of pure feigning by means of which the subject pretends to be liable 
for what is happening anyway, without taking part in it. This is the way 
‘substance becomes subject’: when, by means of an empty gesture, the subject 
takes upon himself the leftover which eludes his active intervention. This 
‘empty gesture’ receives from Lacan its proper name: the signifier; in it 
resides the elementary, constitutive act of symbolization. 

In this way, it is also clear how we connect the Hegelian concept of 
‘substance as subject’ with the fundamental feature of the dialectical 
process: in this process, we can say that in a sense everything has already 
happened ; all that is actually going on is a pure change of form through 
which we take note of the fact that what we arrived at has always already 
been. For example, in the dialectical process the fissure is not ‘sublated’ by 
being actively overcome: all we have to do is to state formally that it never 
existed. This happens in the Rabinovitch joke, where the bureaucrat’s 
counter-argument is not actively refuted by Rabinovitch’s more accurate 
arguments; all Rabinovitch has to do is to accomplish a purely formal act 
of conversion by simply stating that the bureaucrat’s very counter- 
argument is effectively an argument in his favour. 

There is no contradiction between this ‘fatalistic’ aspect of Hegelian 
dialectics - the idea that we ate simply taking note of what has already 
happened - and his claim to conceive substance as subject. Both really aim 
at the same conjunction, because the ‘subject’ is precisely a name for this 
‘empty gesture’ which changes nothing at the level of positive content (at 
this level, everything has already happened] but must nevertheless be 
added for the ‘content’ itself to achieve its full effectivity. 



252 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


This paradox is the same as that of the last grain of sand to be added before 
we have a heap: we can never be sure which grain is the last one; the only 
possible definition of the heap is that even if we take away one grain, it will still 
be a heap. So this ‘last grain of sand’ is by definition superfluous, but none 
the less necessary - it constitutes a ‘heap’ by its very superfluity. This para- 
doxical grain materializes the agency of the signifrer - paraphrasing the 
Lacanian definition of the signifrer (that which ‘represents the subject for 
another signifrer’), we are even tempted to say that this last, superfluous grain 
represents the subject for all the other grains in the heap. It is the Hegelian 
Monarch which embodies this paradoxical function at its purest. The State 
without the Monarch would still be a substantial order - the Monarch repre- 
sents the point of its subjectivation - but what precisely is his function? Only 
‘dotting the i’s’ in a formal gesture of taking upon himself (by putting his 
signature on them) the decrees proposed to him by his ministers and 
councillors - of making them an expression of his personal will, of adding 
the pure form of subjectivity, of ‘It is our will . . . ’, to the objective content 
of decrees and laws . 14 The Monarch is thus a subject pat excellence, but only 
in so far as he limits himself to the purely formal act of subjective decision: 
as soon as he aims at something more, as soon as he concerns himself with 
questions of positive content, he crosses the line separating him from his 
councillors, and the State regresses to the level of Substantiality. 

We can now return to the paradox of the phallic signifier: in so far as, 
according to Lacan, the phallus is a ‘pure signifier’, it is precisely a signifier 
of this act of formal conversion by means of which the subject assumes 
the given, substantial reality as his own work. This is why we could deter- 
mine the basic ‘phallic experience’ as a certain ‘everything depends on me, 
but for all that I can do nothing’. Let us exemplify it by reference to two 
cases which should be read together: the theory of the phallus found in 
St Augustine, and a certain well-known vulgar joke. 


14 G. W. F. Hegel, Grundlinien derPhilosophiedesRechcs, Frankfurt: Suhrkamp Verlag, 
1969, Paragraph 280. 



'NOT ONLY AS SUBSTANCE' 253 


St Augustine developed his theory of sexuality in one of his minor but 
none the less crucial texts, De Nupciis et Concupiscentia. His reasoning is 
extremely interesting because at its very outset it differs from what is 
commonly regarded as the basic premises of the Christian notion of 
sexuality: far from being the sin which caused man’s Fall, sexuality is on 
the contrary, the punishment, penitence for the sin. Original sin lies in 
man’s arrogance and pride; it was committed when Adam ate from the 
Tree of Knowledge, wanting to elevate himself to the divine heights and 
to become himself master of all creation. God subsequently punished 
man - Adam - by implanting in him a certain drive - the sexual drive - 
which strikes out, which cannot be compared with other drives (hunger, 
thirst, and so on); a drive which radically exceeds its organic function 
(reproduction of the human species) and which, precisely because of this 
non-functional character, cannot be mastered, tamed. In other words, if 
Adam and Eve had stayed in the Garden of Eden they would have had 
sexual intercourse, but they would have accomplished the sexual act in 
the same way as they accomplished all other instrumental acts (ploughing, 
sowing . . . ). This excessive, non-functional, constitutively perverse 
character of human sexuality represents God’s punishment for man’s 
pride and his want of power. 

How can we detect, where can we locate, this uncontrollable character 
of sexuality? It is at this point that St Augustine proposes his theory of 
the phallus: if man has a strong will and self-control, he can master the 
movementofall parts of his body (here Augustine evokes a series ofextreme 
cases: an Indian fakir who is able to stop the beating of his heart for a 
moment, and so on); all parts of the body are thus in principle submitted 
to man’s will, their uncontrollabilities subsisting only in the factual 
degree of weakness or power of man’s will - all parts except one, the erection 
ofthe phallus escapes inpnnciplemxri s freewill. This is therefore according 
to St Augustine, the ‘meaning of the phallus’: the part of man’s body which 
escapes his control, the point at which man’s own body takes revenge on 
him for his false pride. Someone with a strong enough will can starve to 
death in the middle of a room full of delicious food, but if a naked virgin 



254 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


passes his way, the erection of his phallus is in no way dependent on the 
strength of his will . . . 

This, however, is only one side of the phallus paradox; its reverse is 
indicated by a well-known riddle/joke: ‘What is the lightest object on 
earth? - The phallus, because it is the only one that can be elevated by 
mere thought.’ And to obtain the true ‘meaning of phallus’, we have to 
read both examples together: ‘phallus’ designates the juncture at which 
the radical externality of the body as independent of our will, as resisting 
our will, joins the pure interiority of our thought. ‘Phallus’ is the signifier 
of the short circuit whereby the uncontrollable externality of the body 
passes immediately into something bound to pure interiority of'thought’ 
and, in contrast, the point at which the innermost ‘thought’ assumes 
features of some strange entity, escaping our 'free will’. To use the tradi- 
tional Hegelian terms, ‘phallus’ is the point of the ‘unity of opposites’: 
not a ‘dialectical synthesis’ (in the sense of a kind of mutual completion) 
but the immediate passage of one extreme into its opposite, as in Hegel’s 
example where the lowest, most vulgar function of urination passes into 
the most sublime function of procreation. 

It is this very ‘contradiction’ that constitutes the ‘phallus experience’: 
EVERYTHING depends on me - the point of the riddle - but for all that I 
can do NOTHING - the point of St Augustine’s theory. And from here - 
from this notion of the phallus as pulsation between ‘all’ and ‘nothing’ 
- we can conceive the ‘phallic’ dimension of the act of formal conversion 
of reality as given into reality as posited. This act is ‘phallic’ in so far as 
it marks the point of coincidence between omnipotence (‘everything 
depends on me': the subject posits all reality as his work) and total 
impotence (‘but for all that I can do nothing’: the subject can formally 
assume only what is given to him). It is in this sense that the phallus 
is a ‘transcendental signifier’: if, following Adorno, we define as ‘tran- 
scendental’ the inversion by means of which the subject experiences his 
radical limitation (the fact that he is confined to the limits of his world) 
as his constitutive power (the a priori network of categories structuring 
his perception of reality). 



'NOT ONLY AS SUBSTANCE’ 255 


Presupposing the positing 

There is, however, one crucial weakness in what we have just articulated: 
our presentation of the process of reflections was oversimplified at a 
decisive point which concerns the passage from positing to external reflec- 
tion. The usual interpretation of this passage, which we have accepted 
automatically, is as follows: positing reflection is the activity of the essence 
(pure movement of mediation) which posits the appearance - it is the 
negative movement sublating every given immediacy and positing it as 
‘mere appearance’; - but this reflexive sublation of the immediate, this 
positing of it as ‘mere appearance’, is in itself bound to the world of 
appearance; it needs appearance as something already given, as the basis 
upon which to perform its negative mediation activity. In short, reflection 
presupposes the positive world of appearance as the starting point of its 
activity of mediating it, of positing it as ‘mere appearance’. 

To exemplify this presupposing, let us take the classical procedure of the 
‘criticism of ideology’: this procedure ‘unmasks’ a certain theoretical, reli- 
gious, or other edifice by enabling us to ‘see through it’, by making us see 
in it ‘just an [ideological] appearance’, an expression-effect ofsome concealed 
mechanisms; this procedure consists thus in a purely negative movement 
which presupposes a ‘spontaneous’, ‘non-reflected’ ideological experience in 
its given-immediate positivity. To accomplish the passage from positing to 
external reflection, the movement of reflection has only to take note of hew 
it is always bound to some given, external presuppositions which are subse- 
quently mediated-sublated through its negative activity. In short, the activity 
of positing has to take note ofits presuppositions - external to the movement 
of reflection are precisely its presuppositions. 

In contrast to this current view. Dieter Heinrich, in his excellent study 
on Hegel’s logic of reflection, demonstrated how the whole dialectic of positing 
and presupposing still falls within the categoty of ‘positing reflection’.' 5 Let us 
refer to Fichte as a philosopher of positing reflection par excellence: by 

15 Dieter Heinrich, Hegel im Kornext, Frankfurt: Suhrkamp Verlag, 1971. 



256 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


means of his productive activity, the subject ‘posits’, sublates-mediates, 
transforms the given positivity of objects; he transforms it into a mani- 
festation of his own creativity; but this positing remains for ever bound 
to its presuppositions - to the positively given objectivity upon which it 
performs its negative activity. In other words, the dialectic of positing- 
presupposing implies the subject of the working process, the subject which, 
by means of its negative activity, mediates the presupposed objectivity, 
transforming it into an objectivation ofitself; in short, it implies the ‘finite’, 
not the ‘absolute’ subject. 

In this case - if the whole dialectic of positing and presupposing falls 
within the field of positing reflection - in what consists the passage from 
positing to external reflection? Now we arrive at the crucial distinction 
elaborated by Heinrich: it is not enough to determine external reflection 
by the fact that the essence presupposes the objective world as its basis, 
as the starting point of its negative movement of mediation, external to 
this movement; the decisive feature of external reflection is that the essence 
presupposes itselfasitsown other, in the form of externality, of something objectively 
given in advance- that is to say, in the form ofimmediacy. We find ourselves 
in external reflection when the essence - the movement of absolute 
mediation, pure, self-referential negativity - presupposes itself in the form 
of an Entity existing in itself, excluded from the movement of meditation. 
To use exact Hegelian terms, we are in external reflection when the essence 
not only presupposes its other (objective-phenomenal immediacy), but 
presupposes itself in the form of otherness, in the form of some alien 
substance. 

To exemplify this decisive twist, let us refer to a case which is misleading 
in so far as it is too ‘concrete’ in the Hegelian sense, in so far, that is, as 
it implies that we have already accomplished the passage from pure logical 
categories to concrete historical spiritual content: the analysis of religious 
alienation as developed by Feuerbach. This ‘alienation’, whose formal 
structure is clearly that of external reflection, does not consist simply in 
the fact that man - a creative being, externalizing his potentials in the 
world of objects - ‘deifies’ objectivity, conceiving the objective natural and 



‘NOT ONLY AS SUBSTANCE’ 257 


social forces out of his control as manifestations of some supernatural 
Being. ‘Alienation’ means something more precise: it means that man 
presupposes, perceives himself, his own creative power, in the form of an 
external substantial Entity, it means that he ‘projects’, transposes his 
innermost essence into an alien Being (‘God j. ‘God’ is thus man himself, 
the essence of man, the creative movement of mediation, the transforming 
power of negativity, but perceived in the form of externality, as belonging 
to some strange Entity existing in itself, independently of man. 

This is the decisive but usually overlooked lesson of Hegel’s theory of 
reflection: we can speak of the difference, the fissure separating the essence 
from appearance, only in so far as the essence is itself split in the way 
described above - only, that is, in so far as the essence presupposes itself 
as something alien, as its own Other. If the essence is not in itself split, if 
- in the movement of extreme alienation - it does not perceive itself as 
an alien Entity, then the very duality essence/appearance cannot establish 
itself This self-fissure of the essence means that the essence is 'subject' and not only 
'substance': to express this in a simplified way, ‘substance’ is the essence 
in so far as it reflects itself in the world of appearance, in phenomenal 
objectivity; it is the movement of mediation-sublation-positing of 
this objectivity, and the ‘subject’ is substance in so far as it is itself split 
and experiences itself as some alien, positively given Entity. We could say, paradoxically, that the subject is substance precisely in so 
far as it experiences itself as substance (as some alien, given, external, positive 
Entity, existing in itself): ‘subject’ is nothing but the name for this inner 
distance of ‘substance’ towards itself, the name for this empty place from 
which the substance can perceive itself as something ‘alien’. Without this 
self-fissure of the essence, there can be no place distinguished from essence 
in which essence can appearzs distinct from itself- that is, as ‘mere appear- 
ance’: essence can appear only in so far as it is already external to itself 

What, then, is the nature of the passage from external to determinate 
reflection? If we remain on the level of the common interpretation of the 
logic of reflection, in which the passage of positing into external reflection 
coincides with that of positing into presupposing, things are, of course, 



258 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 

clear. To accomplish the passage in question, we simply have to take note 
of the fact that the very presuppositions are already posited - thus we find 
ourselves already in determinate reflection; in the reflexive movement 
which retroactively posits its own presuppositions. To refer again to the 
active-producing subject which mediates-negates-forms the presupposed 
objectivity: all he has to do is to experience how the ontological status of 
this presupposed objectivity is nothing but the presupposition ofhis activity, 
how it exists, how it is here only for him to use, to perform on it his medi- 
ating activity: how, then, it is itself retroactively ‘posited’ through his 
activity. ‘Nature’, the presupposed object of activity, is so to speak already 
‘by its own nature’, in itself, the object, the material for the subject’s 
activity; its ontological status is determined by the horizon of the process 
of production. In short, it is in advance posited as such - that is, as a 
presupposition of subjective positing. 

If however, external reflection cannot be sufficiently defined by the fact 
that positing is always bound to some presuppositions; if to reach external 
reflection, essence must presuppose itself as its other, things become a little 
complicated. At first sight, they are still clear enough; let us refer again to the 
Feuerbachian analysis of religious alienation. Does not the passage from exter- 
nal to determinate reflection consist simply in the fact that man has to 
recognize in ‘God’, in this external, superior, alien Entity, the inverse reflection 
ofhis own essence - its own essence in the form of otherness; in other words, 
the ‘reflexive determination’ of its own essence? And thus to affirm himself 
as ‘absolute subject’? What is amiss with this conception? 

To explain it, we have to return to the very notion of reflection. The 
key for the proper understanding of the passage from external to deter- 
minate reflection is given by the double meaning of the notion of 
‘reflection’ in Hegel - by the fact that in Hegel’s logic of reflection, 
reflection is always on two levels: 


(1) in the first place, ‘reflection’ designates the simple relation 
between essence and appearance, where the appearance ‘reflects’ the 
essence - that is to say, where the essence is the negative movement 



‘NOT ONLY AS SUBSTANCE’ 259 


of mediation which sublates and at the same time posits the world of 
appearing. Here we are still dwelling within the circle of positing and 
presupposing; the essence posits the objectivity as ‘mere appearance’ 
and at the same time presupposes it as the starting point of its negative 
movement; 

(2) as soon as we pass from positing to external reflection, however, we 
encounter quite another kind of reflection. Here the term ‘reflection’ 
designates the relationship between the essence as self-referential 
negativity, as the movement of absolute mediation, and the essence in 
so far as it presupposes itself in the inverse-alienated form of some 
substantial immediacy, as some transcendent entity excluded from the 
movement of reflection (which is why reflection is here ‘external’: 
external reflecting which does not concern the essence itself). 

At this level, we pass from external to determinate reflection simply by 
experiencing the relationship between these two moments - essence as 
movement of self-mediation, self-referential negativity, essence as 
substantial-positive entity excluded from the tremor of reflection - as that 
of reflection: by experiencing how this image of the substantial-immediate, 
positively given essence is nothing but the inverse-alienated reflection of 
the essence as pure movement of self-referential negativity. 

Strictly speaking, it is only this second reflection which is ‘reflection- 
into-itself of the essence, reflection in which the essence redoubles itself 
and thus reflects itselfin itself, not only in appearance. This is why this 
second reflection is reflection redoubled : on the level of ‘elementary’ 
reflection, reflection in sense (1), essence is simply opposed to appearance 
as the power of absolute negativity which, by mediating-sublating- 
positing every positive immediacy, makes it ‘mere appearance’; while 
on the level of the redoubled reflection, reflection in sense (2), essence 
reflects itselfm the form of its own presupposition, of a given-immediate 
substance. Reflection of the essence into itself is an immediacy which 
is not ‘mere appearance’ but an inverse-alienated image of the very 
essence, essence itself in the form of its otherness, in other words, a 



260 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 


presupposition which is not simply posited by the essence: in it, essence 
presupposes itself as positing. 

As we have already indicated, the relationship between these two 
reflections is not that ofa simple succession; the first, elementary reflection 
(1) is not simply followed by the second, redoubled reflection (2). The 
second reflection is, strictly speaking, the condition of the first - it is only 
the redoubling of the essence, the reflection of the essence into itself, 
which opens the space for the appearance in which the hidden essence 
can reflect itself By taking into consideration this necessity of the 
redoubled reflection, we can also demonstrate what is amiss with the 
Feuerbachian model of surpassing the external reflection. 

This model, in which the subject overcomes alienation by recognizing, 
in the alienated substantial Entity, the inverse image of his own essential 
potential, implies a notion of religion that corresponds to the Enlighten- 
ment’s portrait of the Jewish religion (almighty God as an inverse image 
of man’s powerlessness, and so on); what escapes such an understanding 
is the logic behind the fundamental motif of Christianity: God’s incarna- 
tion. The Feuerbachian gesture of recognizing that God as an alien essence 
is nothing but the alienated image of man’s creative potential does not 
take into account the necessity for this reflexive relationship between God 
and man to reflect itself into God himself, in other words, it does not suffice 
to ascertain that ‘man is the truth of God’, that the subject is the truth 
of the alienated substantial Entity. It is not enough for the subject to 
recognize-reflect himself in this Entity as in his inverse image; the crucial 
point is that this substantial Entity must itself split and ‘engender’ the 
subject (that is, ‘God himself must become man’). 

As regards the dialectics of positing and presupposing, this necessity 
means that it is not enough to affirm that the subject posits its own presup- 
positions. This positing of presuppositions is already contained in the logic 
of positing reflection; what defines determinate reflection is, rather, that the 
subject must presuppose himself as positing. More precisely: the subject effec- 
tively ‘posits his presuppositions’ by presupposing, by reflecting himself in 
them as positing. To exemplify this crucial twist, let us take the two usual 



‘NOT ONLY AS SUBSTANCE' 261 


examples: the Monarch and Christ. In the immediacy of their lives, subjects 
as citizens are, of course, opposed to the substantial State which determines 
the concrete network of their social relations. How do they overcome this 
alienated character, this irreducible otherness of the State as the substantial 
presupposition of the subjects’ activity-'positing’? 

The classical Marxist answer would be, of course, that the State as an 
alienated force must ‘wither away’, that its otherness must be dissolved 
in the transparency of non-alienated social relations. The Hegelian answer 
is, on the contrary, that in the last resort, subjects can recognize the State 
as ‘their own work’ only by reflecting free subjectivity into the very 
State at the point of the Monarch; that is to say, by presupposing in the 
State itself - as its ‘quilting point’, as a point which confers its effectivity 
- the point of free subjectivity, the point of the Monarch’s empty-formal 
gesture ‘This is my will . . .’ 

From this dialectic, we can very neatly deduce the necessity behind the 
double meaning of the word ‘subject’ - (1) a person subject to political 
rule; (2) a free agent, instigator of its activity - subjects can realize them- 
selves as free agents only by means of redoubling themselves, only in so 
far as they ‘project’, transpose, the pure form of their freedom into the 
very heart of the substance opposed to them; into the person of the subject- 
Monarch as ‘head of the State’. In other words, subjects ate subjects only 
in so far as they presuppose that the social substance, opposed to them in 
the form of the State, is already in itself a subject (Monarch) to whom they 
are subjected. 

Here we should rectify - or, more precisely, supplement - our previous 
analysis: the empty gesture, the act of formal conversion by means of 
which ‘substance becomes subject’, is not simply dispersed among the 
multitude of subjects and as such proper to each of them in the same 
manner; it is always centred at some point of exception, in the One, the 
individual who takes upon himself the idiotic mandate of performing the 
empty gesture ofsubjectivation - of supplementing the given, substantial 
content by the form of ‘This is my will’. This is homologous with Christ: 
the subjects overcome the Otherness, the strangeness, of the Jewish God 



262 THE SUBLIME OBJECT OF IDEOLOGY 

not by immediately proclaiming him their own creature but by presup- 
posing in God himself the point of ‘incarnation’, the point at which God 
becomes man. This is the significance of Christ’s arrival, of his ‘It is 
fulfilled!’: for freedom to take place (as our positing), it must already have 
taken place in God as his incarnation - without it, subjects would remain 
for ever bound to the alien substance, caught in the web of their 
presuppositions. 

The necessity of this redoubling explains perfectly why the strongest 
instigation to free activity was procured by Protestantism - by religion 
putting so much emphasis on predestination, on the fact that 'everything 
is already decided in advance’. And now, finally, we can also give a precise 
formulation to the passage from external to determinate reflection: the 
condition of our subjective freedom, of our ‘positing’, is that it must be 
reflected in advance into the substance itself, as its own ‘reflexive deter- 
mination’. For that reason, Greek religion, Jewish religion and Christianity 
form a triad of reflection: in Greek religion, divinity is simply posited in 
the multitude of beautiful appearances (which is why, for Hegel, Greek 
religion was religion of the work of art); in Jewish religion, the subject 
perceives its own essence in the form of a transcendent, external, 
unattainable power; while in Christianity, human freedom is finally 
conceived as a ‘reflexive determination’ of this strange substance (God) 
itself. 

The significance of these at first sight purely speculative ruminations 
for the psychoanalytic theory of ideology cannot be overestimated. What 
is the ‘empty gesture’ by means of which the brute, senseless reality is 
assumed, accepted as our own work, if not the most elementary ideological 
operation, the symbolization of the Real, its transformation into a mean- 
ingful totality, its inscription into the big Other? We can literally say that 
this ‘empty gesture’ posits the big Other, makes it exist, the purely formal 
conversion which constitutes this gesture is simply the conversion of the 
pre-symbolic Real into the symbolized reality - into the Real caught in 
the web of the signifler’s network. In other words, through this ‘empty 
gesture’ the subject presupposes the existence of the big Other. 



'NOT ONLY AS SUBSTANCE’ 263 


Now, perhaps we are able to locate that radical change which, according 
to Lacan, defines the final stage of the psychoanalytic process: ‘subjective 
destitution’. What is at stake in this ‘destitution’ is precisely the fact that 
the subject no longer presupposes himself as subject ; by accomplishing this he 
annuls, so to speak, the effects of the act of formal conversion. In other 
words, he assumes not the existence but the non-existence of the big Other, 
he accepts the Real in its utter, meaningless idiocy; he keeps open the gap 
between the Real and its symbolization. The price to be paid for this is 
that by the same act he also annuls himself as subject, because - and this 
would be Hegel’s last lesson - the subject is subject only in so far as he 
presupposes himself as absolute through the movement of double 
reflection. 
